[cover]

What Is Right with Marriage

An Outline of Domestic Theory

ROBERT C. BINKLEY

and

FRANCES WILLIAMS BINKLEY

[p.i]

What Is Right with Marriage

[p.ii]

[p.iii]



WHAT IS RIGHT WITH MARRIAGE


An Outline of Domestic Theory

by

Robert C. Binkley
New York University

and

Frances Williams Binkley

New York and London
D. Appleton and Company
1929

[p.iv]

COPYRIGHT -- 1929 -- BY
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

[p.v]

TO

R. T. C.

[p.vi]

[p.vii]

IF some one denounces a butcher or grocer for giving short weight, the
denunciation implies the existence of a system of weights and measures.
If some one condemns the conduct of a neighbor, the condemnation implies
the acceptance of an ethical standard which the neighbor is alleged to
have violated. And if it is asserted that something is wrong with
marriage, there is equally implied a standard of judgment, a criterium
of what, with marriage, would be right.

What then is the standard whereby marriage is to be measured? Keyserling
writes as if it were character development; Hamilton plans his research
as if it were primarily "sexual-reactive value"; the sociologists turn
out their textbooks in the seeming conviction that marriage is to be
measured by its contribution to social welfare. Is there then no
standard of excellence intrinsic to marriage itself? The present essay
purposes to explore the ground in search of such a standard.

Since the book has such a purpose, there are a number of things it
cannot be. It cannot be a sex book, like some recent productions, with
hymns to contraception and a sexological interpretation of history, for
marriage involves more than sex. Neither can it range, like other
discussions of contemporary morals, through all fields of ethical
interest; it must be confined to the problem of marriage. It cannot be a
survey of marriage in America, [p.viii] such as resulted from Judge
Lindsey's long observation of the behavior of the youth of Denver, or
from Dr. G. V. Hamilton's scientific study of the lives of two hundred
New Yorkers, or from the interesting study of "Middletown" made by the
Lynds. The marriage phenomenon is more widely distributed in space than
Denver, New York, or Middletown, and in time than the twentieth century.
Just as the descriptive study of marriage and family life concerns
itself with particular times and places, so the normative study searches
for truths that will be universally applicable, irrespective of time and
place. The descriptive method presents particular facts; the normative
method sets up universal standards.

Science is itself both descriptive and normative. Its product is
organized knowledge. The organization of knowledge requires not only the
collection of facts but also the setting up of classifications and
categories. The facts are in the realm of the actual, the
classifications in the realm of the ideal. Facts are tested by
observation, classifications by logic. If marriage is to be treated as
an object of science, these two kinds of exploration must go forward
hand in hand. A science of marriage and family life can be expected to
develop, as economics, political science, and sociology have already
developed, in the interplay of theoretical speculation and statistical
research. Research such as Dr. Hamilton's study of what is wrong with
marriage in contemporary America calls, therefore, for a complementary
analysis of what is right with marriage in all times and places.

Is it not strange that among all the multitude of sciences and academic
disciplines which have set themselves up in independent state, there is
none which constitutes a [p.ix] science or theory of the family? It has
happened, quite by accident, that the study of family relations has been
regarded as a province of sociology. Books on the family are classified
as sociology, and the sociological point of view has dominated the
academic discussion of family life. Our best organized thought upon
domestic relations proceeds from purely sociological postulates and
imputes to marriage and home primarily sociological standards of
excellence -- to perpetuate the race, to transmit the social heritage.
But the point of view and the method of sociology may after all, be ill
adapted to the investigation of the essentials of family life. Doubtless
if family studies had happened to grow up as appendages to economics or
political theory, the methods and presuppositions of these disciplines
would have been equally inadequate. May it not then be useful to
experiment with sketching the outlines of a theory of the family which
shall build itself up immediately from the facts and purposes that
appear in marriage and home, without making use of the preconception
that there are "social institutions"? Such efforts as this may lead
ultimately to the creation of a new academic discipline which shall
furnish more adequate _cadres_ for the organization of thought upon this
most pressing and intimate problem of human life.

Acknowledgments are due to many friends whose thought has been lavishly
lent to this work. Among them are to be mentioned Mervyn Crobaugh,
Frederic Anderson, Malcolm McComb, Cecil Pearson and Joan Wilson
Pearson, Kenneth Robertson and Sidney Hawkins Robertson, Conrad P.
Wright, Dr. Esther Caukin, and Professor John Morris of New York
University. Miss [p.x] Katherine Beswick and Edwin R. Clapp have been
especially patient in reading and criticizing the manuscript. The
underlying thought out of which the book grew we owe to the stimulating
intellectual companionship of Professor Robert T. Crane of the
University of Michigan.

R. C. B.
F. W. B.

[p.xi]

  -------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------ ------
                                                                                    PAGE
  Preface                                                                           vii
  CHAPTER                                                                           
  I.             How It Came About That Domestic Theory Was Written Down            1
  II.            Diverse Theories of Marriage and of the Family which Now Prevail   7
  III.           The Place of Domestic Theory among the Social Sciences             20
  IV.            Of the Nature of a Personal Relationship                           31
  V.             Of the Nature of Marriage                                          42
  VI.            The Natural Family                                                 52
  VII.           The Family and Convention                                          63
  VIII.          The Family and Authority                                           78
  IX.            The Family and Self-Interest                                       89
  X.             The Domestic View of Human Nature                                  101
  XI.            Appreciation                                                       123
  XII.           Time, Love, and Habit                                              128
  XIII.          The Function of the Family                                         134
  [p.xii] XIV.   The Four Types of the Natural Family                               156
  XV.            Marriage and Children                                              167
  XVI.           Marriage and Sex Monopoly                                          188
  XVII.          Marriage and Art                                                   219
  XVIII.         Marriage and the Individual                                        248
  Index                                                                             259
  -------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------ ------

[p.xiii]

What Is Right with Marriage

[p.xiv]

[p.1]

THE authors of this little book are married. They have been married for
years. Having loved each other completely, they still do not venture to
dogmatize upon the probability that this love will continue through an
indefinite future, but they think that their marriage has been
successful, and they expect it to continue so. And they recall with
indulgent tenderness the caution and circumspection with which they made
the decision to marry.

They prepared the way with an extraordinary amount of preliminary
thought and discussion. It was a curious argument, carried on in that
spirit of mingled playfulness and earnestness which is natural to two
young people who sit together in the moonlight. Their purpose was to
clarify their own ideas on the problem and mystery of marriage. Their
method was the method of the schools.

For both of them had been long in the atmosphere of the schools. They
were familiar with the quaint attitudes which professors take toward the
practical problems of life. They had learned in their classes many of
the intricate theories of human conduct which are held in university
circles. The language of the social sciences [p.2] flowed easily from
their lips. And yet they recognized that the question then uppermost in
their minds -- whether to marry or not to marry -- was one which the
textbooks evaded and the theories missed. They set forth therefore to
write their own textbook and to construct their own theory. Upon their
collaboration was shed not only the light of the student's lamp but also
the light of the stars. This outline of domestic theory is the result.

It is not easy to view with scholastic detachment anything so intimately
personal as one's own courtship is while it is in progress. Moreover,
there stands a wide-spread prejudice against such an attitude. It is
generally believed that marriage should result from impulse rather than
from reasoned judgment and decision. A cold calculating of consequences
or a mathematical estimating of probabilities is thought to be foreign
to the spirit of the institution. The only frame of mind which can
decently be held by bride or groom is one of naive and unbounded
optimism. An atmosphere of illusion is deemed as needful as a ring and a
clergyman for the conventional wedding. The privilege of attempting to
see things as they are is reserved for the onlookers who exchange the
stock currency of wedding jests.

If two young things nevertheless make the effort to look upon their own
prospective marriage as impersonally as if it were not their own, and to
scrutinize it as calmly as it it were an investment proposition, they
still lack definite standards by which to judge whether their life plan
is sound or unsound. They have no way of knowing what kind of conduct is
normal in married life, nor of estimating which of the desired
satisfactions they can reasonably hope to obtain and which they must
dismiss [p.3] as illusory. They find that there is no clearly
established notion of what constitutes success in marriage, no
well-defined distinction between the essential and the incidental.

The smooth generalizations which are most current on this subject do not
stand criticism. For instance, it is said that the test of a successful
marriage is happiness; the purpose of a marriage is to attain happiness;
a marriage is a failure which does not bring happiness; those persons
are well mated who continue to be happy though married. But happiness is
a general aim, which we pursue in marriage as in other things; it does
not constitute a specific aim proper to marriage alone. If I decide to
go to college or to move to New York or to trade in my Chevrolet, all
these decisions are equally made in the interests of prospective
happiness. Certainly then one cannot demand of a marriage that it should
guarantee happiness regardless of all other circumstances. Here is one
man whose marriage was perhaps the best and wisest act of his life, but
who has always been dogged by misery and misfortune; here is another
whose matrimonial ventures have three times ended in divorce, who
nevertheless persistently takes pleasure in life. On the strength of
these facts we cannot judge the marriage of the first to have been a
failure and the marriage of the second to have been successful. There is
truth in the idea that marriage has to do with some kind of a total
product of well-being or of misery; it is more legitimate to identify
success in marriage with happiness than to identify success in business
with happiness. But still the generalization that happiness is the end
and aim of marriage is too indefinite to be useful.

[p.4] In the maze of discussion to which every Sunday paper contributes
and upon which every acquaintance has vigorous opinions there is no end
of contradiction and perplexity. Is eternal and undying love a
psychological possibility or a probability? Does conjugal faithfulness
normally turn out to be a pleasing habit or an irksome restriction? If
permanence, stability, and companionship in old age be deemed the aim of
marriage, what (in view of divorce statistics) are the mathematical
chances that a marriage will yield this product? Which is to be held
more sacred, love or marriage, if the two do not coincide? Should
loveless wedlock be dissolved or can it he made worth while? There was
the case of a student friend who lay all evening moaning on his bed:
"She wanted to know if I'd love her always -- damn it -- I told her I
didn't know -- damn it -- I told her she'd have to take a chance -- damn
it -- she turned me down." Which had the more accurate and sensible
understanding of matrimony, the man or the girl who turned him down?

The confusion of standards is particularly perplexing to a young woman.
No formula for her conduct is unchallenged. Her duties are everywhere
uncertain. How much independence can she retain after marriage? When
factories and offices welcome the help of women, when schools offer to
girls the same opportunities for technical training that they afford to
men, when apartment houses relieve wives of most of the tasks that kept
their mothers busy from dawn to dusk, must she still accept it as the
normal course of things that no career is open to the married woman but
the primitive round of kitchen and kinder? If a professional woman
wishes to experience motherhood, must she risk the submerging of her
person[p.5]ality in marriage? Shall we try to close the aesthetic
enjoyment of sex life to all who are not prepared to assume the
obligations of the married state? From courtship to divorce, from
petting to birth control, all conduct is subjected to conflicting
ethical judgments.

The situation is not explained as a mere prevalence of sin and
wrongdoing in a corrupted age, for the standards by which sin and
wrongdoing are to be identified are the very things that are called in
question. The questioning is not the product of artful casuistry nor of
conversational posing; it is deeper than the pretensions of the tea-room
_précieuse_, and more serious than the speculations of a college
sophist. Whether we approve or not we must accept the fact that marriage
is no longer what it used to be. It has new meanings: it brings new
consequences to those who undertake it. Our prevailing theories of
marriage no longer fit the facts.

Perhaps the reason for the lack of a commonly accepted theory of
domestic life lies in the fact that the family, no longer functioning as
an economic unit, nor as a political institution, has come to rest upon
a peculiarly individual sort of relationship, capable of the widest
variation. We find it difficult to apply to it any set of general laws,
or to fit it into logical schemes. The poet or the writer of fiction is
perhaps better fitted to describe and define the elements of a domestic
theory than is the logician or the scientist. A domestic relationship is
at once general, like the relationship of citizen to state or buyer to
seller, and particular, like the relationship of Caesar to Brutus or
Héloïse to Abélard.

It may well be that an entirely new theory or scheme of domestic
relationships must be drawn up by each couple [p.6] entering into them.
Sometimes this theory is actually evolved retrospectively, after years
of married life; sometimes it never finds expression in words, but only
in conduct and attitudes. More often the development of a scheme of
future relationships is a function of the courtship. And so it is with
this present domestic theory -- it is a courtship now after four years
written down. In it the authors have made a systematic statement of
certain great banalities which were a common minimum of their belief.

They have chosen, moreover, to state these banalities as social theory.
They might have put their thought into the form of a prenuptial
agreement, a decalogue or a motto. They preferred the deductive
procedure of the social sciences because in such an organized
presentation there is a possibility, however slight, that something more
generally useful may be found.

[p.7]

HE who writes a theory of marriage has no blank page to write upon.
There are already among us at least four conceptions of marriage, not
always clearly stated, but nevertheless widely believed. The conflict
and confusion of their varying tenets echo in every casual conversation
on the subject, and in our social judgments and attitudes they have
their full share of influence. One theory is naive, two are
sophisticated, one is pedantic. We might name them, for convenience, the
_schoolgirl theory_, the _mousetrap theory_, the _tomcat theory_ and the
_theory of the schools_.

There is implicit in the schoolgirl's attitude toward her beau a simple
but consistent view of love and marriage, which often gives the
conventional marriage to which it leads a wrong start and adds to the
inevitable disillusionment of middle age. According to this view, in
which both sexes participate, one marries when one is in love. But one
must be truly in love, and so a mistake of fact is fatal. The
distinguishing characteristics of true and genuine love are that it
never dies, and that it guarantees happiness if one marries, and sorrow
if one does not. If, having married, one finds oneself unhappy, then it
is evident that true love is lacking. The only valid explanation of such
a situation is that a mistake [p.8] has been made and that love did not
ever exist at all. On this account a wise young person is very careful
not to marry until the fact of true love is very definitely established.
Here arises the great difficulty: there is no final test of true love
save marriage; to test the egg one must break it. The only test that
even the most careful can make before marriage is, according to this
theory, "the test of one's own heart."

This schoolgirl theory is the Western World's basic view of the relation
of love to marriage. If by a feat of imagination we remove it from our
mental ken, most fiction and modern drama becomes unintelligible. Even
the most sordid product of the naturalist school, or such a work as Ben
Hecht's pornographic triumph, _Fantasius Mallaire_, presupposes a
familiarity on the part of the reader with this schoolgirl theory. All
other theories are corrections and criticisms of this one. Though the
sophisticated abandon it, the cigar-store cynics scoff at it, the
professors overlook it, nevertheless it remains unshaken in the popular
mind. Even those who reject it for themselves are likely to encourage
young people to believe it, as mothers teach their children to believe
in Santa Claus. Moreover -- and this is the most important of all -- the
great majority of young men and women who are actually doing the
marrying or who are wrestling with the problem of whether or not to
marry, that is to say, the great majority of people in their late teens
and early twenties, govern their conduct on this schoolgirl theory.[1]

[p.9] Whence came this curious imagery wherewith so many of us are
accustomed to construct our views of family life? It did not come to us
from scholars, like our theories of the State or of economics. The
schoolgirl theory is not accredited among scholars. It has no academic
standing. It has grown out of two strangely different nurseries, of the
preachers on the one side and of the poets on the other.

The Provençal singers of the Middle Ages, the French and Italian
courtiers of the Renaissance, drew up a delicate and fantastic view of
the erotic side of life. The Church contributed a somber and serious
view of marriage. The two doctrines grew up quite independently, to be
finally combined in a popular morality.

The Mediaeval and Renaissance theory of love was not a theory of
marriage; the Courts of Love even decreed that true love was not
possible in wedlock. True love was pictured as a kind of fixed-idea
phenomenon, an almost psychopathic mode of behavior, seldom met with in
fact. The Church's view of marriage, on the other hand, had little
regard for love but suggested the curious concept that marriage was a
spiritual union similar to the union of Christ with his Church.
Eroticism appeared as a necessary though somewhat degrading incident of
married life. And when the Church spoke of erotic life, its language was
anything but poetic: "The wife shall not deny her body to the husband,
nor the husband to the wife." Such was the crude dictum. The only thing
that was common to the preachers and the poets was the notion of
permanence. Poets and courtiers said that true love was everlasting; the
Church said that marriage was irrevocable; now the schoolgirl says
[p.10] that both must be permanent and that they must coincide.

In the face of the manifest improbability that true love, rare enough in
itself, should coincide with marriage, the schoolgirl resorts to the
expedient of a _deus ex machina_, the "right man," the prince. If the
"right man" appears, all difficulties vanish; the conjunction of true
love is established, eternal felicity is assured; nothing remains but to
marry and live happily ever afterward. Consequently the all-sufficient
preparation for marriage is the daydream, wherein the image of the
prince or the dream girl is defined. The actual identification in the
flesh of prince or dream girl must be left to intuition. And a young
person's thought upon marriage is considered amply developed when he has
made an imaginative character sketch of a future mate.

The cult of the prince and the dream girl, the "right man" and the
unknown goddess, rounds out the schoolgirl theory. The theory is
dangerous to human happiness because it suggests no explanation for
unhappiness in marriage except the explanation that the marriage itself
was a mistake; it counsels no course of action to improve an
unsuccessful married life except the divorce court. It turns the minds
of both man and woman back toward a single decision of their lives --
the choice of each other as partners -- and diverts their minds from the
innumerable decisions which they make every day. It gives to every
marriage the character of being saved or lost as soon as the ceremony is
completed, so that all that remains is to let time reveal the wisdom or
foolishness of the initial step.

What actually happens in everyday life is that people [p.11] sooner or
later give up their "illusions," as they say, and recognize that their
partners are neither princes nor dream girls, and find plenty of
opportunity for exercising constructive ingenuity in developing their
married lives. The false evaluations of the schoolgirl theory may not
wreck marriages, but do consistently give them a false start.

The converse of the schoolgirl theory is the tomcat theory. This latter
is the product of disillusionment or worldly wisdom. The premises of the
tomcat theory are simple. Man is a predatory creature; he is sex-minded;
he requires sex satisfaction. Whether he is to seek this satisfaction in
marriage or out of it depends partly on the general merits of the
marriage institution. There is no expectation that the partners in
marriage will be extraordinary people. Whereas the schoolgirl's ideal
marriage requires that bride and groom he exceptional and unique, the
tomcat ideal reckons with the fact that all men and women are pretty
much alike. Whereas the schoolgirl ideal demands true love, the tomcat
ideal is satisfied if marriage is put on a sex basis. Consequently the
tomcat theorists do not bother with character sketches of ideal mates --
except perhaps to insist upon physical beauty or "sex appeal" -- but
their speculations often constitute a thoughtful judgment on the merits
of the marriage relation itself.

The principles of the tomcat theory are illustrated in that memorable
Rabelaisian conversation in which Panurge, seeking advice from
Pantagruel upon his proposed marriage, presents arguments pro and con,
while Pantagruel replies alternately, "Marry then, in God's name," and,
"Then in God's name do not marry."

  [p.12] "But you see," quoth Panurge, "since I cannot get along without
  a woman would it not be much better for me to associate myself with
  some pure and honest woman rather than to get a new one every day,
  with continual danger of beating, or of disease which would be worse?"

  "Well, then, in God's name, marry. . . ."

As the long argument unwinds, Panurge displays the characteristic tomcat
attitude: he wants to marry because he needs a woman; he hesitates
chiefly because he doubts whether he will have exclusive possession of
the woman he marries. The central fact of marriage, to him, is sex
competition.

When marriage is looked upon as an instrument of sex satisfaction, its
superiority to the unmarried state is claimed upon the ground that it
stabilizes sex relations. It offers a vested interest in sex
satisfaction, in lieu of a precarious tenure. It affords an expectation
that there will be permanent rather than transitory attachments, and
guarantees that the children will be the objects of fixed legal rights
and duties. Thus the chief _raison d'être_ of marriage is its
proprietary result. A husband or wife is a species of property purchased
at a risk with one's own liberty. In making the purchase one seeks to
give up as little liberty and to obtain as complete a possession as is
possible. Marriage therefore does not end sex competition, but gives it
a new orientation. Husband and wife seek each to enforce an exclusive
sexual right over the other, and to resist a like enforcement as regards
himself.

To the man's insistence that his wife shall not make him a cuckold there
corresponds the woman's concern [p.13] that she shall "hold" her
husband. She must curb his predatory predilections and monopolize his
affections. The comic strips and the feature pages of the newspapers
tacitly recognize this as a proper wifely preoccupation. An elaborate
technique has been devised for holding a husband -- a technique wherein
the arts of cookery and the devices of harlotry have equally their
place. This technique has been made known to the world in the racy
popularizations of Elinor Glyn. It takes for granted an essential
antagonism between husband and wife. By making porridge without lumps
and by choosing appropriate personal perfumes; by toasting bread without
burning it and by wearing silk underwear -- by such means as these does
a wife fulfill the purposes of a tomcat marriage. The test of success,
for husband and wife alike, is the physical fidelity of one's partner to
the marriage bed.

A variant of the tomcat theory is the view which Havelock Ellis has
expounded as the mousetrap theory. This theory is humorously defended by
H. L. Mencken, and seriously propounded by the eminent sociologist,
Professor McDougall:

  The essence of the institution of marriage is that custom, law and
  public opinion force man to submit to a bond, to give binding
  guarantees under penalties, as a condition of obtaining satisfaction
  of strong desires. . . . The young man would prefer to have his lady
  love entrust herself to him without other guarantees than his vows of
  devotion . . . but society, dominated in the main by the matrons and
  the graybeards, takes a more cynical and skeptical view of the
  devotion inspired by sex attraction. The experience of the ages has
  taught it that too often love is fleeting; that in the companionship
  of the sexes, as elsewhere, familiarity too often breeds indifference
  [p.14] and not seldom engenders friction and resentments . . . [hence]
  . . . the mothers and fathers will not give up their daughters to
  their lovers without the guarantee of the marriage bond.[2]

If there is no better defense of marriage than that which McDougall
offers here -- that marriage is good because it serves to keep together
people who would prefer to be apart -- it may prove difficult to
convince the new generations that marriage is worth while. For man may
find a way to the "satisfaction of strong desires" without "giving
bond," and the mothers and fathers may find that it does not rest with
them to decide whether their daughter shall be given to her lover or
not. The mousetrap theory constitutes a joyless acknowledgment that
marriage is a fetter.

The schoolgirl theory is aesthetically satisfying but scientifically
outrageous; the tomcat and mousetrap theories are in accord with common
sense observation but they insult aesthetic sensibilities. All of these
theories, however, relate directly to matters which are of immediate
concern to the young people who are doing the marrying. With most of the
professors it is otherwise. Their theories of marriage are aesthetically
inoffensive and scientifically plausible, but they have little bearing
on the aspects of marriage which are in fact most perplexing. The
professors declare that the family is a fundamental group in the complex
of groups that make up society. They assert that the family has two
functions of basic importance: the propagation of the species and the
transmission of the social heritage in the education of the young. All
this is very true; it is elaborated and [p.15] proved over and over
again in innumerable books; it enters the doctrine of all the social
sciences. It constitutes a laborious and indisputable answer to a
question that nobody asks.

Of what value are these scholarly dicta to the common man? A man likes
to have harmony in his family group, but he cares nothing about the
fundamental position of the family group in the structure of society. He
may marry in order to have children, but he certainly does not marry in
order to propagate the species. He may pay for the education of his
child, but he cares not one whit tor the transmission of the social
heritage. His real interests in the family lie on a plane of personality
which the theorizing of the scholars does not touch.

When Molière's Sganarelle approached the learned Pancrace to obtain
advice as to whether he should marry, he got little aid. Pancrace first
demanded of him whether he wished to speak Italian, Spanish, German,
English, Latin, Greek, Arabic, or Hebrew, and when Sganarelle admitted
that he spoke only French the Savant told him, "Please pass to the other
side, for this ear is reserved for scientific and foreign languages, the
other is for the mother tongue." And after he had passed to the other
side and asked his question again, he still got no satisfaction, tor
Pancrace insisted on talking about logic and art and the use of
language. So Sganarelle went off muttering, "To the devil with these
savants who will not listen to people."

The professors are still suspected of preferring languages that are
foreign to the common man. We can imagine a modern Pancrace demanding:
"Do you wish to discuss this from the legal, ethical, economic, or
social [p.16] point of view?" If Sganarelle then replies that it is a
personal matter, Pancrace leans back in his chair and pronounces, "Oh,
that is different," knits his brows and wonders what he can say. He
would find it difficult to draw upon his scholarly knowledge for any
counsel that would be of real value. For the academic teaching
pertaining to marriage and the family seems quite irrelevant in the
solution of a real difficulty. The professors are found making
definitions that do not clarify real problems, and ignoring the question
upon which there is a universal demand for more light. There can still
lie found those who will turn away from the schools damning "the savants
who will not listen to people."

Within the past few years there have been indications that the scholars
are changing their attitude. A greater number of genuinely useful books
on marriage have been published since 1920 than were published in the
preceding century. The Protestant Church view of sex, love, and marriage
has been formulated by a national Committee on Marriage and Home.[3] A
survey of the social and legal branches of family law, including
marriage and divorce, birth-control legislation, and the financial
relationship between husband and wife, is being conducted at Columbia
University. President MacCracken's Institute of Euthenics at Vassar
College and Count Keyserling's great symposium on marriage, as well as
Dr. Hamilton's masterly research, represent noteworthy efforts to be
helpful. President MacCracken has set out to found an applied science of
home-making; Count Keyserling has conducted a literary "symphony" of
opinion in which the thoughtful [p.17] mind can detect certain dominant
themes of a marriage philosophy. Dr. Hamilton has begun the gigantic
task of describing objectively and statistically the married lives of
normal people.[4] There is a new interest and a new spirit of inquiry in
matters relating to the family, but there has not issued forth from the
schools any new doctrine to meet the needs of the common man, and to
supplant the schoolgirl and the tomcat theories of marriage.

The material for such a new doctrine is being accumulated with great
diligence. There is under way the creation of a social science which
will devote itself exclusively to the study of the family. Ernest R.
Groves, even though he may not admit it, is another of the founders of
the coming science. He writes on "Social Problems of the Family," but
his real interest is in the personal problems of family members. A vast
and chaotic literature exists. There are books by free-love writers who
denounce love[p.18]less wedlock, books by socialists and feminists who
resent sex inequality in marriage, enthusiastic books by eugenists who
seek by enlightened mating to prevent race deterioration, indignant
books by conservatives who protest against the break-up of the home. The
list of able men and women who contribute to this literature grows
rapidly: C. P. Gilman, Ernest R. Groves, Beatrice Hinkle, Willystine
Goodsell, E. R. Mowrer, Margaret Mead, Mary Ware Dennett, Count
Keyserling, and S. D. Schmalhausen to go along with the names of such
pioneers as Westermarck, Havelock Ellis, and Mueller-Lyer. The files of
learned magazines which give attention to the family problem grow longer
as the years pass. Whether a periodical be devoted to charities or child
welfare, parentage or prostitution, its editors recognize the problem of
the family as an insistent object of their attention.

Despite this apparatus of discussion and erudition, there has been so
far no thorough and consistent scholarly covering of those aspects of
family life which are of greatest interest to us. Neither sociology nor
sexology suffices. "Our study of the family has been like the blind man
describing the elephant," said Professor Eliot before a meeting of
scholars and social workers. But the tendencies now clearly visible will
lead ultimately to the establishment of a department of scholarly
inquiry which will not ignore the romantic and personal sides of family
life, but will rather focus attention upon them. The girl poet says to
her lover:

  Whether or not we find what we are seeking
  Is idle, biologically speaking.

[p.19] The time is at hand for the laying out of a field of disciplined
investigation wherein it will no longer be idle whether or not we find
what we are seeking in marriage. There is room for a new branch of the
social studies which can deal as amply with the problems of family life
as economic theory deals with the problems of getting a living, or
political science with the problems of the State.

[p.20]

TO build a theory that will contain and explain the variable
imponderables of the marriage relationship seems at the outset a rather
shocking enterprise as well as a formidable one. Such a theory must deal
with the intimate activities of two personalities in the home, a secret,
sheltered region, hedged about with barriers to the outer world and
cherished as the last refuge of privacy. The scholars of the Victorian
age were naturally reluctant to enter its mysterious precincts. John
Stuart Mill would have been aghast at the idea of placing in a scholarly
context those essentials of family existence which a man and his wife
discuss together after they have gone to bed. Malthus was conspicuously
indifferent as to "whether or not we shall find what we are seeking,"
and inclined, with his brutal theory of moral restraint, to the notion
that we would not find it at all. We do not even possess a word that
will cover in a general way the problems of family life as economics,
for instance, covers the problems of business life.

The Greeks had such a word. It was none other than the word _oikonomia_.
It was applied by them to the study of all matters relating to the
household, from the family budget to the affection of one member for
another. Xenophon's treatise on _oikonomia_ is an essay on domestic
[p.21] theory and art. It touches very little upon the subject matter of
modern economics, but begins with the question: "whether the management
of the household is an art, like the art of the physician . . . ," and
then presents an exposition of the art in the form of a conversation
between a new-wedded husband and his bride:

  . . . When we were well enough acquainted, and were so familiar that
  we began to converse freely with one another, I asked her for what
  reason she thought I had taken her to be my wife, that it was not
  purely to make her a partner to my bed, for that she knew I had women
  enough already at my command; but the reason why her father and mother
  had consented she should be mine, was because we concluded her to be a
  proper person to be a partner in my house and children: for this end I
  informed her, it was, that I chose her before all other women; and
  with the same regard her father and mother chose me for a husband; and
  if we should be so much favored by the gods that she should bring me
  children, it would be our joint business to consult about their
  education and how to bring them up in the virtues becoming mankind;
  for then we may expect them to be profitable to us, to defend us and
  comfort us in our old age.

We need not follow the substance of Xenophon's argument; it is
sufficient that we appreciate the fresh and natural point of view of the
newly married who are supremely interested in their own personal
destinies and not at all in the destinies of the race. The bride is to
be a "proper partner in my house and children"; the children are to be
brought up in virtue in order that "we may expect them to be profitable
to us, to defend us and comfort us in our old age." Such homely and
appealing purposes as these would be recognized as sound by all who
marry, from Sganarelle to our own younger generation. [p.22] For the
problems of the race and of society are apprehended in marriage as
personal problems. It is our misfortune that the scholars have lost this
point of view in exploring the nature of the family.

Xenophon was not the only Greek who wrote upon _oikonomia_. To Aristotle
we owe a profound discussion of the same subject. An important part of
the first book of Aristotle's _Politics_ is devoted to an analysis of
_oikonomia_ and especially of the distinction between _oikonomia_, the
household art, and chrematistics, the art of money-making. For
_oikonomia_, according to Aristotle, is the art of acquiring what is
needful, while chrematistics is the art of acquiring without limit. This
profound distinction has been lost to modern thought. It is a
distinction which, had we retained it, would have preserved us from the
blind absurdities of classical economics.

There is no modern system of thought -- unless indeed it be in the field
of ethical speculation -- which presumes to treat of the art of
acquiring what is needful. Modern economics is a doctrine not of the
household art, but of the art of money-making. In Xenophon's book,
Socrates proves that he is really wealthier than his host, for though
the host has many estates and slaves he has even more expenses and
responsibilities. "Wealth," according to the principles of _oikonomia_,
is not a mere quantity of goods, but a ratio of goods to needs. And this
is the kind of thinking that family life requires. But modern economics,
even it it disguises itself under a new name such as "welfare
economics," is not a theory of acquiring what is needful, but rather of
acquiring without limit. It corresponds to the Greek chrematistics
rather than to _oikonomia_. The doctrine which once treated of the
house[p.23]hold in terms of human needs has disappeared, its very name
being usurped by a rival.

The history of European institutions shows clearly enough the reasons
for this submerging of the doctrine of the household art. In the Middle
Ages, social thinking went hand in hand with theology; not till the
fifteenth century, when keen Italian thinkers were reformulating the
Greek and Roman ideas which they had rediscovered, did social theorizing
achieve an independent intellectual status. At that time it seemed that
the Greek doctrine of the family would be revived and the Greek point of
view would find new expression. Even before Machiavelli wrote _The
Prince_, Alberti had written the most distinctive book on the family
since Xenophon -- a manuscript entitled _Della Famiglia_. His point of
view was the simple and natural one that had been Xenophon's. He was
concerned with the welfare of the family for its own sake, and not for
the sake of God or morality or society or the nation. He dealt with
ultimate values in the domestic situation -- he discussed, in short,
"what is needful." Unfortunately, Alberti had no successors.

The family of Alberti's day was both a business enterprise and a family.
The Medici bankers in the Middle Ages kept their business and household
accounts in the same book. It did not occur to them that business could
be a separate compartment of existence. The commercial revolution of the
sixteenth century changed this attitude. "Italian bookkeeping" which
rigorously separated business from family affairs became customary in
all commercial operations. Business enterprise and family life took
leave of each other. The attention of students fol[p.24]lowed business,
ignoring the family. Scholars wrote on the principles of chrematistics,
and called their product economics.

The titles of works on the family have multiplied in modern times, until
they now choke fat bibliographies. We have treatments of the family as a
social institution, as an educational institution, as an economic, even
as a spiritual institution -- but only very recently of the family as a
domestic fact, existing for itself and having its own system of values,
and being itself the test of "what is needful." As one side or another
of family life has projected itself into affairs, discussions and
analyses of the family have resulted. LePlay made an interesting
classification of families, patriarchal, rooted, and unstable, as he
considered their contribution to the stability of the nation. He made
the family the starting point of a system of sociology. Luther set down
in stark terms the abject position of the wife, as he discussed the
relation of the home to God's plan. When the industrial revolution began
breaking down the old family solidarity, a flood of dissertations on the
sanctity of the home, women's sacred sphere, and the holy duties of
parenthood poured forth. But there has been no passionless survey of the
home from the theoretical side, as there has been, for example, of the
State.

This lack of an independent domestic theory is due largely to the
absence of a real need for such a theory in the past. The theories of
economics, political science, and sociology were evolved in response to
genuine problems of conduct and belief; they did not arise out of the
idle play of intelligence; they were forged to be the tools of kings and
the weapons of parties and parliaments. [p.25] The family presented no
issue of conduct to the European mind; men took it for granted.

Our own generation has seen a problem of the family arise in an
insistent and thought-compelling form, and has seen the collapse of the
sex-discussion taboo which once vitiated all analyses of domestic
matters. Thus we are prepared for a revival of the ancient study of the
art of the household.

This revival is coming about largely in response to pressure from below.
Newspaper subscribers expect daily counsel on family and marriage
problems as a part of their newspaper purchase. The Lynds, in the survey
of "Middletown," found that 68 out of 109 wives of working men and 26
out of 29 wives of business men read regularly or occasionally the
Dorothy Dix syndicated column of advice. Masses of sophisticated women
who graduate yearly from universities and masses of taxpayers who
support the public schools are demanding education for married life.
Sganarelle now sits on the school board, or even on the board of
trustees of the university, where he can make Pancrace do his bidding.
And he is insisting that something be done about this tangle of
misconceptions and uncertainties which we encounter in marriage. High
schools have established courses in home economics -- Xenophon's old
word lent back to the household whence it came. Universities have
offered courses, and organized departments to study some of the related
problems. In the Vassar Institute of Euthenics, _oikonomia_ comes once
more into its own. The outline of the summer session announces lectures
on "Social Problems of the Home," "Child Guidance," "Household
Technology," and "The Manipulation of [p.26] Batters and Doughs."
Aristotle's broad conception of the rightful place of the family in the
subject matter of social thought, and his keen intuition that in the
family one has to do with a balancing of the necessities of human
nature, are still sound.

But the family has changed indeed since Greek times; especially has it
changed within the memory of the present generation. The trend has been
ever in the direction of freedom. The element of consent has become
increasingly important. The arrangement of marriages by parents is
looked upon as an anachronism. The dissolution of marriage has become
easier. Marriage begins with the engaging of two free personalities, and
continues as long as there is mutual consent to its continuance. No
mystery in marriage is greater than this: that just as the coming
together of two bodies can create new life, so the interplay of two free
personalities engenders new personal values and realizes new and higher
levels of conduct. This is the fact toward which the schoolgirl gropes
with her crude belief in "the right man" and the consummate personal
relationship of love.

Perhaps it is best that the scholars of the past neglected domestic
theory, for their labors might have served only to confuse and obscure
the problems which confront us today. A theory based on the notion of
status and duty would now be a useless encumbrance, for it is the
personal element in the modern family that calls for an explanatory
doctrine. It is this personal aspect of family life which the three
great systems of the social sciences leave out of account. Political
theory is primarily interested in human conduct as related to the will
of the State, economics in the situation where each individual seeks
[p.27] his own advantage, sociology in the complex total of influences
which people exert on each other by living in groups. They do not
concern themselves with the personal relationship.

The situation suggests that we draw up a theory of marriage, which will
explore conduct that springs out of that relationship; which will
examine attitudes like jealousy or friendship as they occur between
specific persons; which will describe the interplay of activity when an
individual finds himself in the presence of no such generalized entity
as a "state," a "market," or a "society," but simply in the presence of
another individual like himself. Can we not undertake to study the
family as the State has been studied ever since Bodin and Hobbes laid
down the foundations of modern political theory, and as the business
world has been examined since Quesnay and Adam Smith propounded their
theories?

Here we make the basic assumption of domestic theory. Let it be, if you
will, a fictional assumption; it may none the less be an enlightening
one. We assume that the relationship of husband to wife is one of
personalities. We will make the experiment of deducing the consequences
of this assumption, of following out its corollaries, and explaining its
meanings. This experiment will involve, at least tentatively, the
setting apart of an independent field of social study, which will be
related to the other main fields of the social sciences somewhat as is
indicated in the chart on the following page.

In exploring the nature of the family from these postulates we will have
to take into account political, economic, and social facts, just as
political theory, economics, and sociology have each something to say
about [p.29] the family. We will recognize frankly the limitations of
all theorizing: that theory cannot take the place of wisdom. And yet we
feel the driving need for a rigid and self-consistent analysis of the
domestic problem. Moreover, we are confident that theories relating to
human affairs, however logic-bound they may be, do not remain mere
neutral intellectual exercises, but develop a profound usefulness. As
soon as they gain general credence they serve not only to describe
conduct, but also to justify and determine it. If we say that an act is
illegal or uneconomic, a complete theory of jurisprudence or of
economics lends its wealth of meaning to our judgment. Similarly, in our
theory of the family, we will hope to give meaning to the idea that
certain kinds of conduct are domestic, whereas others are nondomestic.
Such is our ultimate goal. Our starting point is the personal character
of the relationship of man to wife.

[p.28]

DOMESTIC THEORY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES

                                                                _Science or Discipline_   _Relationship_         _Subject Matter_      _View of Human Nature_
  ------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------- ---------------------- --------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  Social Sciences: deal with man in relationship to other men                                                                          
                                                                Sociology                 Social influence       The Group             Man responds to influence of group.
                                                                Political theory          Political domination   The State             Man subject to the will of other persons under authority.
                                                                Economic theory           Economic interest      The Economic System   Man acts in his own interests.
                                                                Domestic theory           Personal               The Family            Man acts in the interests of another person.

[p.29] In writing an Outline of Domestic Theory one would endeavor first
to define this personal relationship on which marriage is based, just as
the political scientist puzzles the freshman by a definition of
sovereignty on the first page of his textbook. What does the lover mean
who says, "I love you for yourself alone?" Can this love be transferred
to another person? Will it remain constantly the same? Must it include
all the activities of the loved one? These questions must all be taken
into account.

What is a family? How are its members bound together? Should they be
subject to the authority of a dominant member, or is the family
self-governing? What is one to expect of his partner in marriage, and
what may be required in turn? Why marry at all? And perhaps most
difficult of all: Whom shall I marry?

[p.30] Let the professor of domestic theory ponder these questions, and
study the answers systematically. He may perhaps create a "domestic man"
as the economists have created in the "economic man" a fictitious being
who figures as a norm of behavior. He will discover laws of domestic
behavior that will correspond to such coinage as "the law of diminishing
returns" in the sister sciences. He will provide a terminology for
precise discussion of domestic problems. His cool, impersonal theorizing
will furnish a refuge from the bitterness of personal disagreement in
family life, and be helpfully at hand in lovers' conversations.

[p.31]

No offense is greater in a lover than this: that he should treat his
love "impersonally." No lapse is more final and devastating in courtship
or domestic life than a lapse from personal feeling between those who
have known the pitiless intimacy of love or marriage. Anger, hatred, and
jealousy, so long as they are fraught with personal meanings, are likely
to dissolve in unaccountable ways or transmute themselves into love
according to strange laws of their own. They are frequently no further
removed from passionate affection than the width of a hair.

The distinction between personal and impersonal relationships is a vital
one in human affairs. Personal relationships, be they those of friend to
friend or of husband to wife, be they motivated by love or by hatred, be
they transitory or permanent, stand apart and in a class by themselves.
They cannot be explored by the social sciences, they are alike
inexplicable to political theory, sociology, and economics. Theirs is a
special level of being, a peculiar order of existence, which must be
especially studied, defined, and described.

The most obvious and inevitable quality of a personal relationship is
that it is not transferable. It attaches to determinate individuals who
cannot be duplicated nor replaced. A new personal relationship can be
established, [p.32] an old one can be abandoned, perhaps the driving
force that initiated the relationship may give way to another, but no
substitution can be made of one individual for another in the same
relationship. It Helen leaves Menelaus and flees with Paris, it is
absurd to describe the new situation as a continuation of the personal
attachment of Menelaus and Helen, with Paris acting as a substitute. The
personal relationship between Helen and Menelaus continues, with love
changed to fear and resentment. The attachment of Helen and Paris is a
new entity, a new relationship.

On the other hand, any relationship which can be transferred from one
individual to another is to that extent impersonal. When citizens enter
and leave the allegiance of a State, when laborers enter and leave the
employ of a factory, when men supplant each other in all the diverse
functions of organized society, their personality is only incidental to
the political, economic, or social tie which they assume or avoid. We
consider that these relationships themselves are constantly in being,
whoever may be the persons bound therein. Generation after generation
follows each other in the life of the State, and the order of political
relationship perdures, oblivious to these innumerable personal
replacements. But not so with relationships of personality. If a friend
dies the friendship is at an end, even though new friends be found; if
the wife deserts and obtains a divorce, the marriage is at an end, even
though a new marriage ensues. This non- transferable character of a
personal tie is so obvious that to state it is to prove it.

The second characteristic of a relationship of personality is that it is
variable. Love can give place to hatred, [p.33] understanding to
misunderstanding, respect to loathing, between the same two persons.
Likewise affection can increase, love can become more intense, an
intellectual attachment can become an erotic attachment, and the
relationship continues a personal one. Such variations are not merely
possible; they are normal and necessary. They can no more be avoided
than change can be prevented in the life of an individual. Just as human
beings mature and grow old, so must their personal relationships run a
gamut of change. When a virgin becomes a bride she may imagine that her
attitude toward her husband is fixed for all time, yet in fact she is
standing on the threshold of unavoidable novelty and discovery. If her
erotic personality is aroused and developed, a wealth of new meanings
will cluster around her attitude; if there is no such awakening of
erotic life, new tensions inevitably appear. There are infinite
possibilities before her; the only thing she cannot do is to remain just
as she is, with her love for her husband continuing to be exactly as on
the wedding day. The very meaning of the verb _to love_ changes with
ripening experience. So it is with friends. Friendship can deepen or it
can become attenuated; it cannot remain unchanged. When two friends who
have not seen each other for years are reunited by some chance meeting
they speak to each other with the same language that they were wont to
use in earlier days, each tells the other that there has been no change,
but the sense of change is actually overwhelming. They inquire for news
and they resort to reminiscences, and it may be that the absence seems
to have deepened the regard of each for the other. But the change is
there, whether it is brought about by sharing each other's life or by
not sharing each [p.34] other's life, by remaining in contact or by not
remaining in contact.

The variation in a personal relationship is not only inevitable; it is
also continuous. It proceeds historically, the present being
continuously built upon a past. In this respect personal relations must
be viewed as growing or unfolding things which develop with
indescribable intricacy toward loves or hatreds, or toward their own
dissolution in indifference and oblivion. Every love and every
friendship has its own case history, to which harsh words as well as
kind actions contribute. The quarrels, pacts, and promises of lovers are
all parts of the continuity of their love. No one fact or event can
permanently fix or define a personal relationship -- not even so
critical a fact as a betrothal, a marriage, a divorce, or the birth of a
child. The trivial and the commonplace events of life constantly
contribute to the flow of variation. As every lover who is not a bungler
knows, there is no external distinction between great things and trivial
things in matters of love.

The third thing we know about a personal relationship is that it is
_free_. It involves an element of consent and free will. In this respect
it differs from a relationship of status, wherein the element of freedom
and consent is of no consequence.

It is necessary to insist at this point that the "personality" of which
we speak is not the legal or sociological abstraction which sometimes
goes by that name. From the legal point of view a person is a subject of
legal rights and duties. A corporation can be a legal person. From the
sociological point of view a person is a subject of social rights and
duties. "An individual is born into the [p.35] world, he acquires
status, and becomes a person." So writes Park in developing a definition
of personality. These conceptions are useless for domestic theory
because in outlining such a theory we are trying to uncover facts which
lie beyond the range of legal and social status. The pure metaphysical
definition offered by Boethius is better suited to the purpose of
domestic theory: "Personality is the individual substance of a rational
being," and hence the ultimate unit of any ethic. In this sense a person
is a complete and total individual, in all aspects, biological,
psychological, and rational. Better yet is Kantor's conception of
personality as the complete psychic organism in action. Here is the
person we know in everyday life, who acts willfully and responsibly, and
whose welfare is a matter of ethical value.

Only those beings can participate in a personal relationship who are
capable of acting as free agents. A German philosopher has bid us
imagine a mechanical sweetheart who should in every respect except one
resemble a human individual. This monstrous mechanism would have beauty
and softness and warmth and all the external qualities of a human being,
but would lack autonomy. She would do nothing whatsoever of her own
will. All her actions would proceed from immediate external causes. It
would be impossible for our minds to ascribe any action whatsoever to
herself as its author. If she responded to an embrace, the response
would be a mere reaction to our own act, like the rebound of a ball
thrown against a wall. There would be nothing that originated within
herself. Truly such a sweetheart might be valued, as a lovely picture or
a vase or an ivory is valued, and the possession of her might give rise
to aesthetic enjoyments, [p.36] but she could not enter completely into
a personal relationship.

Even when two persons are wont to act freely and autonomously toward
each other, it may be that certain of their particular actions are
performed under constraint. Usually such actions are more or less
indifferent and inconsequential in developing their personal relations.
The husband who contributes to his wife's support by order of the court
receives no thanks for his bounty. The friend who merely pays a lawful
debt does not normally expect to have his payment counted as an act of
friendship. Even if actions done under constraint should enter into the
fabric of a personal relationship, it would still be true that no
personal relationship could maintain itself on these alone. The
qualities of consent and free action must be present; the hypothesis of
free will must be accepted; otherwise the relationship is not personal.

Finally, a personal relationship is _comprehensive_. It involves the
complete personality of one who engages in it. It extends itself to his
whole being, because he is not only a subject but also an object in the
relationship. As a subject he has autonomy; as an object he has value.
And his value attaches not to any particular aspect or activity of
himself but to his whole self. In this respect a personal relationship
differs fundamentally from the social relationships which are described
in other social studies. For social relationships do not usually involve
complete personalities, and social theories isolate for discussion this
or that capacity or aspect of a personality.

In describing the relationship of citizen to state, buyer to seller,
individual to community, no attempt is made to account any individual a
complete person. Human con[p.37]duct is discussed as if each man were
made up of segments, like an orange. The purchase of a cigar is an
economic act and concerns man in his economic capacity; the casting of a
ballot is a political act and concerns man in his political capacity. If
we undertake to give an account of Henry Ford's economic behavior we
will be much concerned as to whether he oversupplies a demand, whether
or not he employs men, whether he buys or sells stock, whether or not he
is honest in business engagements. But we will not concern ourselves as
to whether he is happy or sad, religious or irreligious, handsome or
ugly.

But where relationships are personal, everything matters. Account must
be taken of everything that a man may do, and of everything that may be
done to him. His reputation and his tennis stroke, his indigestion and
his bank account, his stock of after-dinner stories and his secret
discontents -- all these are matters of moment to his friends and to his
family. The facts and experiences of office and shop which the husband
does not mention to the wife none the less enter into the domestic
relationship because they affect the personal totality of his self. They
produce exaltation or rheumatism, wisdom or weariness, jocularity or
tuberculosis, and all of these enter into a personal reckoning.

Young people contemplating marriage are sometimes terrified by the
all-embracing character of this personal relationship which they are to
establish, for better or for worse, before the world. They imagine that
they are entering into a sort of bondage, the one to the other; that the
personal relationship, because it takes all interests into account, must
dominate all interests. They hedge themselves about with reservations
and declarations [p.38] of autonomy. "I love you," says the man, "but I
object in advance to any suppresssion [_sic_] of my passion for red
neckties. I reserve the right to select my own haberdashery." "I love
you," admits the woman, "but I certainly do not engage to admire you
while you are shaving, or to be amused at your parlor talk. My aesthetic
sensibilities must not be coerced."

We know of a young couple who took this matter very much to heart. They
agreed before they were married that if it should turn out that
matrimony was a bar to the young man's career, a divorce would be freely
granted, with good will on both sides. They tried to mark with a sharp
line the extent to which each partner was to assume an interest or
responsibility in the affairs of the other. They thought that in this
way they were guaranteeing to each other an autonomy which would
otherwise be sacrificed. In fact, it is not uncommon for partners in
marriage to make extraordinary efforts to retain for each such complete
independence. Husband and wife live in separate apartments and meet only
once a week for dinner, to the end that the personality of the one may
not infringe on the personality of the other.

We are here confronted by a paradox. For we have described the new
marriage as being free because it is personal, and at the same time we
have perceived that a personal relationship reaches comprehensively to
every interest of the persons who participate in it. How does this
freedom permit comprehensiveness, and how is this comprehensiveness
consistent with freedom? The solution of this paradox requires that we
analyze more carefully that personal value which he has who is the
object of a personal relationship.

[p.39] It is obviously necessary that those who are personally connected
should have a kind of value for each other. This is the truth that calls
forth the perpetual protestation: "I love you for yourself alone." For
if I do not love you for yourself alone, I do not love you at all. If I
love you for your money, or for your social position, it is these I love
and not you. If I love you as a means to anything whatsoever and not as
an end in yourself, then I do not love you personally. Likewise, if I
hate you for your position, because you are a capitalist or a policeman,
I do not hate you personally. If I love or hate you personally it is
because my attitude focusses on the totality of yourself. You in all
your completeness are the object to which I attach value. And thereby I
am led indirectly to take note of everything that concerns you, because
it concerns you, and only in so far as it concerns you. Your world
becomes my world, but only indirectly. If I am interested in the
externals of your business or social success, it is because these are
factors in your welfare. Only those rays from outside which are caught
up and refracted from your personality can light our relationship.

But it I try to pick and choose among those of your interests that I
will make my own, then I degrade the personal character of my interest
in you. If I say that I will concern myself about your cooking, but not
about your painting, about your appearance but not your reading, I
replace my interest in you with a mere interest in some of your
accomplishments. In principle my attitude degenerates to the level of
his who loves you for your income or social position.

The lovers who strove so diligently to limit the range [p.40] of their
interest in each other did not understand this intricate and beautiful
dialectic by which a personal attachment ramifies and extends itself to
all fields. "If I interfere with your career, I will leave you,"
promised the girl. This promise cannot be viewed as a limitation of her
interest in her lover; it is not a renunciation of interest in his
career, but rather an assumption of unlimited interest in it, based on a
recognition that the career is a matter of first importance to her
beloved.

The freedom and comprehensiveness of personal relationships are not
contradictory qualities; rather they are complementary. Without the
possibility of free autonomous action by the _subject_ of a personal
relationship there could be no effective appreciation of personal value
in the _object_ thereof.

These four qualities: nontransferability, continuous variation, freedom,
and comprehensiveness are the characteristics of every personal
relationship. To the extent that these are present, the relationship is
personal; to the extent that they are lacking, the relationship lacks
personal character.

Is this capacity for entertaining personal relationships a universal and
inevitable human quality? Anthropologists of the old Morgan school used
to depict savage society as if the individual therein was "completely
dominated by the group, the horde, the clan or the tribe -- [as if] he
obeyed the commands of the community, its traditions, its public
opinion, its decrees, with a slavish, fascinated, passive obedience."[5]
Malinowski has helped to change the picture of savage life and to
portray primitive [p.41] man as neither an extreme collectivist nor an
intransigeant [_sic_] individualist, but "like man in general, a mixture
of both."

The unitary, self-determining individual human being is an ultimate
datum which the social sciences find it difficult to dispense with. His
very existence connotes the possibility of personal relationships.

True enough, personality concepts may be differently colored in
different cultures. The close association which the Western mind makes
between _personality_, _motivation_, and _freedom_ may be an accidental
historical product of the Christian-Teutonic fusion. A study of Samoan
culture by Miss Mead suggests that the personality concept of the Samoan
adolescent links personality with overt achievement alone, and is
indifferent to the introspective world of motivation. The variations in
the notion of personality may modify, but cannot extinguish, the general
pattern of personal relationship in human affairs.

In some civilizations the most distinctive imprint of this personality
pattern is borne by friendship groups, age groups, or erotic groups. The
kinship group may be a relatively impersonal establishment. But in the
contemporary Western World the pattern of personal relationship is most
fully realized in the family group of parents and children. This fact
will appear as we explore more carefully the nature of marriage and the
family.

[p.42]

MARRIAGE is a personal relationship between a man and a woman, involving
sex intercourse between them, and having an aspect of permanence or
duration. There are many personal relationships which are not marriages:
there are, of course, the personal relationships of men or of women
among themselves; there are also personal relationships between men and
women but not involving coitus, and relationships accompanied by coitus
but having no aspect of permanence. These last are love affairs, not
marriages.

Marriage in this sense seems to have its counterpart in the mating
habits of certain birds and animals. It is anterior to human custom and
law. The primitive and universal quality of marriage is derived from the
sex situation rather than from social influences. The species reproduces
bisexually by a method which requires a separate sex act for each
fertilization. The sex act is pleasurable, and to that extent
constitutes an end in itself. It is aesthetically a thing complete in
its own transitory moment. But it is also something more than a thing of
ephemeral beauty. Taken in connection with its consequences over a
period of time, it has an entirely different meaning, for it results in
the situation of parenthood. Hence the significance of that aspect of
duration which is present in marriage, but not in the love affair. The
essen[p.43]tial elements of the marriage problem are already posed by
this difference between the aesthetic value of coitus and the biological
value of fertilization.

Marriage in nature being so simple a fact, it is confusing to the mind
to turn to the complexity of marriage as a social institution, where it
becomes tangled up with problems of property, government, law, and
religion.

Every human society imposes some standard form upon the marriage
relationship. There are social rules governing coitus just as there are
social rules governing eating. The sex situation is of course no more a
product of these rules than hunger is a product of dinner table
etiquette. But we necessarily think of the sex situation in terms of the
social rules which are applied to it in our own environment. These
social rules generally distinguish between coitus which takes place
within and without a marriage union. Marriage in all societies
constitutes a standard system of duties and privileges existing between
persons designated as husbands and wives. There is also provided a
standard means whereby persons can be so designated. So diverse are the
systems of responsibilities assumed in marriage, and so various are the
means whereby marriage is effected, that the differences among
matrimonial institutions are more impressive than the similarities.

The variety of institutional forms which marriage assumes is such that
ethnologists are overwhelmed. They try to order their knowledge by
sorting marriage institutions into groups and classes. Thus monogamy is
distinguished from polygamy, polyandry, and group marriage. Or it is
observed that some peoples regard marriages as commercial transactions
in which brides are pur[p.44]chased, others think of them as warlike
forays in which brides are captured, still others imagine that a
marriage is a religious sacrament, or a contract between bride and
groom, or a legal status. The wedding ceremony in America is often
regarded as chiefly significant in that it serves as an index of the
station in life assumed by the families concerned. In the presence of
such multiplicity we do well to focus our thought upon those aspects of
marriage which are universal.

Not marriage only, but the love affair also, is institutionalized in a
variety of forms. Whatever may be the form of the marriage institution,
its very existence implies that the community makes a distinction
between marital and extra-marital sex intercourse. Some societies
require, others permit, others try to forbid sex relations outside of
marriage. The enforced requirement to submit to prostitution was
characteristic of the temple cults of Mesopotamia; the free permission
to indulge sex appetite outside of wedlock was usually a corollary of
the institution of slavery which allowed the purchase and use of slave
girls for this purpose; a license to sex indulgence was also a part of
seasonal festivals such as the Saturnalia. The comprehensive ban upon
coitus outside of marriage is especially characteristic of Christian
ethics, which are savage upon this point, assuming toward fornication
and adultery an attitude of horror comparable to that which most
civilizations have reserved for incest.

In consequence of this peculiar bias, all who consider marriage from the
Christian point of view place tremendous emphasis upon the sex monopoly
aspect of wedlock. To such lengths is this idea carried that permanence
itself is often sacrificed to sex monopoly. An act [p.45] of infidelity
results in a divorce even when there are children to be cared for. Thus
the marriage institution sometimes defeats its natural intent. It is a
mistake to regard sex monopoly as a universal characteristic of
marriage.

Despite the severity of official Christian ethics toward coitus out of
wedlock. Christian communities often temper their condemnation with a
tolerant recognition that fornication and prostitution are an inevitable
result of the frailty of human nature. And thus in Christian communities
as elsewhere there is a tendency toward the standardizing of those sex
unions which are not marriage. The duties and privileges of the
Christian prostitute, the Roman concubine, the African slave girl, or
the Japanese geisha tend to become as clearly defined as those of the
wife. A variety of socially defined sex relationships appear. In the old
Roman law full legal marriage or _justae nuptiae_ could be contracted
only by Roman citizens; the slaves, freedmen, and provincials had to be
satisfied with a less formal status. The law of Egypt enforced a
contract for a prostitute's services, but this contract did not
constitute a marriage. In the underworld of America the reciprocal
obligations of Frankie and Johnnie, according to the well-known ballad,
were so well understood that the bar-keeper and the sheriff both
recognized "that he was her man, and he done her wrong." Some of these
relationships are so distinctly defined that one hesitates whether to
call them marriages or not. So it was with _concubinitas_ and
_contubernium_ (slave marriage) in Roman law, and so it is with the
common-law marriages in modern America.

In general, it is safe to correlate permanence with [p.46] marriage.
That sex institution which looks furthest into the future is the
marriage institution; the others are institutions of concubinage or
prostitution. A Roman citizen could purchase a slave girl and marry a
wife. The slave girl was his as long as she lived, or until he disposed
of her. There was permanence of a kind in his relations with her. But
the marriage with the wife looked even further into the future. The
progeny of the marriage was the heir who would continue the family
corporation, administer the ancestral property, worship the domestic
gods. The Roman wife was not a slave, for legally her status was that of
a daughter (_in loco filiae_). But in some societies slave purchase is
the only sex tie which has any aspect of permanence at all. As to such a
culture we say that slave purchase is the marriage institution.

The social institution of marriage seems to be devised in order to put
some certainty into sex unions. But it often defeats its purpose, and
nowhere more conspicuously than in America, where a slender legal
technicality often determines whether one is married or not. The courts
are often called upon to decide whether some poor mortal entangled in
the law is married or free. A man who has secured a divorce in Mexico
from a wife living in New York cannot be sure whether he is married if
he happens to be lingering upon the soil of Massachusetts. Two people
touring America together may find that as their train crosses state
boundaries they are automatically married and unmarried time and again.
They pass over rolling prairies as man and wife; the train comes to an
iron bridge and presto, they are only lover and mistress; the train
moves on through another state and for a few [p.47] tense hours the man
is a bigamist; another state boundary is reached, and the two are again
legally married.

Even where the legal marriage unquestionably exists, the characteristics
of natural marriage may be lacking, so that the marriage has no meaning
at all. This is illustrated in the career of Don Juan, whose innumerable
marriages were never intended to be anything but transitory love
affairs. The same moral can be seen in the story cited from family case
records as follows:

  Jacob McDaniel and Mary Murphy were reared in the uninspiring
  atmosphere "Back of the Yards," and grew up in a community not
  conducive to highest morals. In fact, the fathers of both were
  drinking men, and Jacob's father, especially, had the reputation of
  being unkind to his wife. The couple had been neighbors and
  schoolmates from infancy but were in no sense betrothed at the time
  Jacob became engaged to another girl who had moved into the community.
  Before the day set for the wedding, however, Mary's mother discovered
  that her daughter was pregnant and that Jacob was the one responsible
  for her condition. Pressure was brought to bear, and five days before
  her baby was born Mary Murphy became Mary McDaniel. Aside from the
  gloomy satisfaction of giving the child a name the marriage was a
  farce, for Jacob never pretended to make a home for his wife and baby.
  He continued his attentions to the other girl, who was receptive.
  Eventually they eloped, going to a large city in the Middle West,
  where they lived as man and wife.[6]

We might conceivably find something in the nature of marriage in Jacob's
relations to the girl with whom he eloped, but as between Jacob and Mary
no real marriage ever existed. It is wrong to consider this an instance
of [p.48] a marriage dissolved by desertion; it is rather an instance in
which the law describes as marriage something that lacks the essence of
the marriage situation.

For there is certainly in marriage a reality which runs deeper than the
definitions which our institutions, or the institutions of any society,
give to the marriage relationship. This fundamental reality is
compounded of three elements: persons, sex, duration.

The development of Western civilization in the past few decades has gone
far to strip marriage of all but its elementary meanings. The
entanglement of the marriage institution with the institutions of
government, religion, and property is rapidly dissolving. The State no
longer upholds the husband as the administrative despot of his
household, nor permits him to beat his wife with a stick the size of his
thumb. The Church sees marriages made without its consent or
collaboration. The property rights of husband and wife need not be
merged by the act of marriage. Even the social consequences of
parenthood tend to be distinguished from the responsibilities of
marriage, for the community takes over more and more of the function of
educating the young, and the tendency of legislation is to place the
legitimate and illegitimate child on an equal footing as regards rights
against parents. Moreover, the widespread knowledge of birth control
methods is making possible the deliberately childless marriage. If we
abstract from marriage its consequences in government, religion,
property, and parenthood, what remains?

There remains the fact that certain definite persons are designated as
man and wife. This is the rationale of all wedding ceremonies. Whether
in form the wedding be a [p.49] purchase, a capture, a sacrament, or a
contract, and whether the man be taking his first wife or his tenth, the
effect of the ceremony is invariably that certain persons are thereby
designated as being thereafter husband and wife, which previously they
were not. Thus marriage is primarily a thing of definite persons.

There remains also the fact of sex intercourse (though not necessarily
sex monopoly or parenthood). There is no form of marriage which denies
this to husband and wife. Even Roman Catholic Christianity, with its
strong animus against sex, yields to this universal rule in one of its
curious enactments. If two are married, and take a vow that their
marriage will be spiritual only, their vow is permitted by the Church.
But if they then have intercourse they are not guilty of the sin of
fornication, but only of the sin of breaking a vow.

And further, there remains the fact of duration. This does not mean that
a marriage is essentially indissoluble. The extreme limit to which a
society might go in carrying out the idea of permanence in marriage is
to forbid divorce and kill the spouse which survives the death of the
other. No marriage custom goes so far as to apply this rule equally to
man and wife, though some societies encourage the ritual murder or
suicide of a surviving wife. Somewhat less emphatic with respect to the
permanence of marriage is a custom which prohibits the remarriage of
widows though it permits them to live. And finally there is the attitude
which insists on permanence only to the extent of forbidding divorce.
And beyond this there are the innumerable devices for terminating a
marriage, with a variety of distinctions between the rights of a husband
to cast out a wife and the right of a wife to free [p.50] herself from
her husband. The marriage which cannot be terminated is the exception
among marriage institutions; the marriage which permits divorce is the
rule. Both kinds of marriage, however, point to the same conclusion:
that marriage is a thing of duration. The persons designated as husband
and wife are assumed to continue in that relationship through a period
of time. A positive act is required in order to terminate their marriage
union, whereas sex relations under conditions of rape, prostitution, or
seduction (_vide_ Don Juan), terminate themselves in their own moment.
Sex life in marriage is assumed to be continued through time, just as
sex life outside of marriage is assumed to consist of separate completed
episodes. And when the idea of permanence enters nonmarital sex
relations, these approach the status of marriage. As the prostitute
becomes a mistress or a concubine her position approaches that of a
wife.

If these three things -- person, sex, duration -- are the essential
elements of marriage, it follows that marriage has universally impressed
upon it the fourfold quality of personal relationships:
nontransferability, continuous variation, freedom, and
comprehensiveness. That it is nontransferable follows from the fact that
the persons married are specifically designated; if one party marries
some other person, he does not thereby continue his first marriage, but
makes a new one. That it is continuously variable follows from the fact
that it has duration, and must therefore build up a history in which a
present is derived from a past. That it is free is a consequence of the
sex element, for there is a natural freedom in coitus. This act normally
fulfills the desires of both parties. Even the proprietary conception of
marriage cannot an[p.51]nul this freedom. Was it not a slave girl whose
emotion overflowed in the Canticles? And there is comprehensiveness in
the marriage relationship because it is anterior to that sophistication
which divides and distinguishes between the different capacities and
qualities of a human being. Sex grasps the total psychological person
just as procreation engages the whole biological individual. In the
presence of such elemental facts as birth, death, and sex the
multiplicities of culture dissolve away. The marriage relationship
stands before us, therefore, as essentially a personal relationship,
more primitive and general than society itself.

[p.52]

THE word _family_ has never been adequately disciplined and defined. It
has not been invested with precise meaning. In common usage it may mean
many things: one's self and ancestry; one's wife and mother-in-law plus
sisters, cousins, and aunts; all persons who live together under one
roof, however they may be related; or simply parents and their children,
however they may be domiciled. In the social sciences the word is
equally protean: the varieties of kinship groups to which it can he
applied are legion; it can be used to describe a household which
includes persons who are not kin, as in the case of the Greek family
which included slaves. Not all of these meanings given to the word are
equally useful to those who sit together under the moon to discuss the
founding of a family.

If domestic theory is to be helpful to those who need its help it must
discuss as "the family" that entity which is created by marriage. Some
writers hesitate to admit that a family exists unless there are children
as well as husband and wife. But in following their lead, we should
neglect the investigation of what may well be the most critical period
of married life -- the period of the honeymoon. The entity which is
created by marriage obviously consists of the members, husband and wife:
nor is there anything novel or startling in this observation. The
hus[p.53]band-wife membership is necessarily primary, the parent-child
membership secondary and derivative. So much at least is guaranteed by
the physiology of reproduction.

Ethnologists, moreover, are prone to regard as families many kinds of
groups which are more complex or extensive than the simple union of
husband, wife, and children. There are families which include
totem-ancestors and family gods, as well as several generations of
living members. But even in such complex groups, the husband-wife-child
unit exists as a component part of the larger organization. There are
many families without totems, gods, or patriarchs, but none without a
union of husband and wife, and the possibility of children. Therefore,
if we apply the word "family" to those groups which consist of husband
and wife, with children as possible additions, we bring before ourselves
the facts which are at once the most universal as applied to the
families of all times and places, and the most essential, as applied to
the families of to-day.

It is strange indeed that the sociological writers, with all their flair
for coining new words, have not thought to invent a word to designate
precisely this group of parents and children, to the exclusion of all
other persons. Kinship-group nomenclature is still in a chaotic state,
like botanical nomenclature before Linnaeus. If the anthropologists had
invented the necessary word we would welcome it, but we hesitate to
burden the already overloaded vocabulary of the social sciences with a
new term. It is preferable to use the ancient word, but to understand it
in the restricted sense. Whenever there is danger of ambiguity we can
use the expression "natural family" to make clear that we refer to
parents and children alone, [p.54] and not to any broader group. The
natural family is the group which most concerns us. We have only to
imagine the situation of a courtship to see that this is true.

Here are two who are about to marry. What, in their understanding, is
this "family" which their marriage will create? They remember that in
sociology classes they learned that the family is a kinship group.
Economics professors told them that it was a consuming household. Their
thought rejects these classifications. The family which holds their
imagination is the primal, atomic family of husband and wife. If they
have relatives they will regard them as outside the intimacy at their
domestic enterprise. They have little use for the genealogical
conception of a family as a thing extending back through their
ancestors -- something which they must perpetuate. The family that
interests them is not either of the families of which they are already a
part; but rather the new family which they together are about to
establish. This leads them to a very precise and narrow conception. The
family is _themselves_ in a new relationship. The fact that they, the
two persons there in presence, are to be united in the new family is so
important that it overwhelms all other facts and considerations. As
Louis XIV said, "l'état, c'est moi," so may they say, "the family -- it
is ourselves."

The family as they see it, is the group created by a marriage: husband,
wife, and possible children. This seems to them a natural and inevitable
conception. Thus they lay down the limits of their own household and
thus they envisage the families of their friends. It follows as a
corollary from this conception that the same [p.55] individual can he at
once a member of more than one family. The wife may be "daughter in her
mother's house and mistress in her own," and have membership in two
distinct families, each having some kind of claim upon her. The
"relatives" who form the nebulous kinship groups of contemporary society
are held together by just such ties of dual membership.

In many civilizations the dominant kinship group is one of these,
aggregations of families -- such as the Chinese household or the Roman
_familias_. These complex groups are often antagonistic to the integrity
and independence of the natural family. The Chinese bride, who must obey
her mother-in-law while filling a subordinate rule in a great household,
has less opportunity for real family life than an American wife who is
full partner with her husband in a two-room apartment. The impending
disintegration of the Chinese household institution may mean the actual
emergence of the natural family in China. Chinese conservatives are
already complaining of the threatened "disruption of the family," while
from our standpoint there is no disruption, but rather an emancipation
of the family.

There are trends in our own society which seem similarly ambiguous. The
tendency of young people to find their own mates is an evidence that
another vestige of patriarchal organization is disappearing. It is
sometimes cited to prove that domestic ties are being loosed, but it
does not indicate any weakening of the natural family. Rather it
indicates that the natural family is crowding out the kinship group
organization. We will, therefore, inspect with caution all those
generalizations which assume that the family is diminishing in
importance in our civiliza[p.56]tion. It may well be that the groups
which are diminishing in importance are these nonfamily kinship groups.

This conception of the family, like any other, has its border line
cases. If the father dies and the widow continues to care for the
orphans, is the household still a family? According to our definition it
is not. It is indeed a kinship group, and in many ways its structure and
nature may resemble that of a family, but it is not one in the strict
meaning here given to the term family. And what of the polygamous
family? It would seem that under conditions of polygamy or polyandry the
family is created by the first marriage, and subsequent marriages
increase its membership, just as births increase the membership of a
monogamous family. So strict a definition may do violence to an
emotional attachment to the word family, but it is necessary in order to
bring to light useful general truths.

In the natural family, membership is fixed and definite. Marriage and
birth designate certain individuals as members of the family. Some of
these (the husband and wife) are primary in the sense that without them
there is no family. If they separate the family is extinguished. Others
(the children) are secondary. The family can exist without them, and
they can leave it without destroying it. But no member of the family can
transfer his membership to another person. All members are definitely
designated; their family membership is a part of themselves.

The family is, therefore, a union of persons, not of capacities; it is a
closed system; it is unlike other groups. Of some groups one can be at
one time a member and later not, without affecting the continuity of the
group [p.57] life. Societies and corporations maintain their identity
from generation to generation, but the family cannot outlast the life of
its primary members. The membership of husband and wife comes to an end
only in the dissolution of the family. Consequently the family, within
the span of a human life, must pass with its members from youth to old
age.

If we compare the family with the groups which are the subject matter of
other social studies this difference will strike us continually: that we
can never say, "Such and such determinate individuals constitute this
State or this society," whereas we must always say, "Such and such
determinate individuals constitute this family". The State outlasts any
of its subjects, and the continuity of society exceeds the length of
human lives. But no family lasts longer than the determinate members who
compose it. If citizens transfer their allegiance or hermits withdraw
from all intercourse with their fellow man, the resulting situation is
of minor importance in the study of State or society. Contrast with this
the importance of divorce in the family situation. The difference
between the fundamental problems of domestic theory and of other social
studies can be summed up in these words: _In the study of most groups we
are called upon to explain a constant relationship between a succession
of individuals; in the study of the family we are called upon to explain
a variable relationship between the same individuals._

Family membership involves interaction among members; it is not an inert
status but a matter of life and growth and change. When the members lose
all touch with each other, the family ceases to exist. If a husband
[p.58] and wife should separate after their wedding night, and their
child be brought up in an orphan asylum, out of touch with its parents,
there would he no family, although there would be legal marriage and
biological parenthood. Just as real marriage has an aspect of duration,
so real family membership requires interaction with other members. The
members need not live together; it is only necessary that they should
have some personal contact and that in their thoughts they should take
each other into account. The mother can go abroad, the child to school,
but such separation does not impair the existence of the family as long
as personal interaction continues.

Here there is another element of the definition of the family: The
family consists of the designated members provided personal interaction
goes on between them. Here again, posed with all the terrible intensity
of life, is the whole problem of personal conduct in marriage. Does this
interaction of family members follow any known laws? Can it be
understood and controlled? Can we apply to it the ordered manner of
thought that we use in other great problems? Or must we content
ourselves with rule-of-thumb catalogues of advice no better than the
"ten commandments for wives" which a divorce court judge publishes, or
the reiterated counselings of newspaper feature writers?

The Chinese have maintained for twenty-five centuries as a basic text of
their literature a discourse upon the reciprocal rights and duties of
the members of a household. Their household, of course, is not the same
thing as a natural family. But the Confucian doctrine of domestic life
is in its way systematic, comprehensive. Nevertheless we do not find in
it the expression of any [p.59] inner law of family life. Like the
divorce court judges, the feature writers, and the sociological field
workers, Confucius was concerned with preventing the disruption of the
household, with the pathology of family life, and not with the laws of
health and growth. Lao-tse, the contemporary rival of Confucius,
criticized the Confucian teaching on this very ground:

  When Family ties begin to gall
  Then come Piety and Parental Indulgence.

In the same way the Round Table on the Family at a recent meeting of the
American Sociological Society echoes the criticism that the study of the
family has been too much an investigation of failure and domestic
disease; too little an inquiry into domestic success and well-being.

That successful family life is a definite accomplishment to be planned,
striven for, and achieved by a continuous effort of art and will is an
idea apparently less active in the minds of married people than the idea
of possible separation. Courtship aside, most of our discussion of
family life takes a negative tone. The discussion over the teacups is of
the latest divorce. People are always referring, either in jest or in
earnest, to a possible dissolution of the marriage. How often the heavy
laugh that follows one of the witticisms about getting another mate has
a taint of bitterness in it! There are women who talk and plan dreamily
of what they would do if their home should break up, much as they
previously talked and planned of what they would do when married. There
are men who find the principal field for the exercise of their feeling
of ambition in thinking of what they would [p.60] accomplish if they
were not tied down by a wife and family. This pernicious habit of mind
is due in part to such things as the tomcat theory of marriage, or the
sex- monopoly obsession, but it is also due to the lack of a definite
and positive ideal of family membership, capable of engaging our powers
of workmanship.

Let us see clearly what is meant by successful family life, and we will
turn our minds and energies to it. In order to know what the meaning of
successful domestic life may be, we must know the laws of this
interaction among members which is the essential of family existence.
This interaction is, first of all, personal. The primary members find
this character impressed upon their relationship by marriage itself. For
if marriage is personal, so also is the family relationship, since it is
but another side of the same thing. The secondary members, that is to
say the children, cannot in infancy enter fully into this relationship.
As they grow older they become free agents and establish a complete
personal relationship with the other family members.

The assumption that the relationship of family members is essentially
personal is the basic dogma of domestic theory. It has implications as
wide as the range of human achievement. It means that spontaneity rather
than conformity is the principle of success in marriage. It means that
the natural family is the inevitable refuge of personality in a
mechanized civilization.

In the light of this assumption we can weigh and compare different
marriage institutions by observing whether they encourage or obstruct
the interplay of personality among family members. In the family of an
old Roman, or in the harem of an Oriental monarch, we should expect
[p.61] to find much more importance attached to considerations of
status, much less significance given to personality than in the family
of to-day. But no matter how deeply the natural family may be submerged
in a larger group, and no matter how comprehensively the duties of wife
and husband may be catalogued and dictated by the community, there is
always a margin of possibility for free personal interaction. Cato the
Elder, the stern guardian of the strictest _mores_ at old Rome, who
denounced a Roman senator for embracing his wife in public, delighted to
help in bathing his infant son, although this was by no means a duty of
a _paterfamilias_. Certainly that civilization which gave us the stories
of the _Arabian Nights_ must have been perfectly familiar with the
personal character of a family relationship. But the Occidental
household of to-day is especially well-suited to be the locus of this
personal relationship because it has cut loose from almost all functions
save those of the natural family,

The significance of the natural family as a place for the play of
personality is especially marked in these days when almost all other
contacts are being dehumanized. Employers and employees are no longer
personally acquainted with each other. The chain-store replaces the
individual tradesmen who knew his customers by their first names; the
corporation supplants the business which was previously run by a
proprietor who felt personal responsibility for everything that went on.
The machine crowds out the talent of the artisan until even the
musicians go on strike against the radio, as the hand-weavers once broke
up the power looms. The mechanical regimenting process goes so far that
even the children's play [p.62] is standardized, supervised, and
controlled. The household alone holds out against this process. The very
fact that it does hold out, that it refuses to be standardized and
controlled and reduced to rule, is a fact which leads some critics to
fear that the family is on the wrong track, that it is endangered and
may disappear.

As regards some of these kinship groups which are called families this
fear may be well founded. But as to the natural family there is no
danger. Like marriage, it is anterior to society itself, and in one form
or another will survive. It serves today a very real need, and is
adapting itself to that need.

[p.63]

IT is an axiom of courtship that a man and a woman can best make love to
each other when they are isolated from the rest of the world. The
presence of another person inhibits them. Three is a crowd. The crowd,
be it three or a thousand, imposes upon lovers a type of conduct to
which they may not inwardly consent, and operates upon their minds in a
subtle negative way. They recognize this influence and seek to escape
from its restraint. Their breaking away is an anti-social gesture of
great symbolic significance. Simply by being alone together they defy
the world, and protest that in the deepest interests of their lives they
desire no intervention by their fellow men. In this anarchic spirit
families are born.

Nevertheless, the natural family runs in mesh with the system of
conventions which community opinion defines. We continue to be
sensitive, in family life as elsewhere, to the opinions of people who
personally mean nothing to us. The little sidewalk bully stops
tormenting his playmate when the casual passer-by pauses to look at him
with disapproval. A wife or husband can be goaded to fury by the remarks
and gossip of neighbors. Even the independent spirit who defies
criticism or holds himself aloof from praise is still conscious that the
community has an opinion of him. The man who delights in shocking [p.64]
the neighbors is taking account of the fact that there are neighbors to
be shocked. Whoever would escape from the pressure of community opinion
must renounce completely the society of his fellow men. But in love life
and in family life such renunciation is only partial and incomplete.
Vain is the hope of the tenor who proposes to

  Find perfect peace
  Where joys never cease
  And let the rest of the world go by-y-y-y-y!

The two conflicting principles of conformity and independence are
present in the organization of every home. On the one hand, there is
always the standardized conduct which the community imposes upon family
members; on the other hand, there is the privacy of the home which
shelters the married couple from the community.

Whenever in the course of the daily adjustments of family life the
objection is put, "but people will make remarks," or the interrogation
is heard, "but what will people say?", the whole subject of the relation
of family to society is brought to issue. For in some ways the family
must take account of the opinion of the community, and to some extent it
must leave society out of the reckoning. It must make some gestures of
acquiescence to convention, and it must also withdraw beyond the reach
of convention. Where is the line to be drawn?

It is purposed here to set forth three principles which the family may
use in dealing with the social conventions; namely, the principle of
_creative workmanship_, the principle of _isolation_, and the principle
of _autonomy_.

[p.65] The intricate mechanism by which the community imposes its
standards upon the household is explained by certain doctrines of
sociology. The sociologists happen to he more interested in the social
functions of the family than in the functioning of the family itself,
but their doctrine is none the less valuable in this connection, for
whether we study the significance of the family in society, or of
society in the family, we encounter the same basic laws of human
behavior and the same fundamental dilemma of conformity versus
individual freedom.

Sociological doctrines assume that the opinions and conduct of
individuals are largely determined by the influence of other people
around them. The white child reared in the Indian camp learns the Indian
language and shares the opinions of the tribe. He looks at the world and
sees there what Indians see. He forms habits that conform to the habits
of those around him. The same child in another environment would have
learned a different language, held different opinions, seen other things
in the world, and formed different habits. From such simple
illustrations as this we form the concept of the _socially-given_ which
involves the collateral concepts of the group, the culture, the
institution, the social process, and perhaps the social force. There is,
in this sense, a socially-given element in the family.

In every culture there are standardized ideals of domestic conduct which
each individual learns from his social environment. Society teaches each
individual his proper role and status. In our own culture there is the
ideal of the stern and just father, the dutiful daughter, the tender
wife and loving mother, the obedient son. One learns these standards of
conduct just as he learns [p.66] the meanings of words, and in fact
these ideals do actually become a part of the language. The word wife or
husband includes in its meaning some notion of the standard correct
conduct for wife or husband.

Naturally these meanings are distinctive for each culture. Here the wife
must fetch food from the market, there she must not be seen on the
street; here she must wear a wedding ring, there she must veil her face;
here she must give herself to her husband's guest, there she must he
chastely above suspicion: here she must obey, there she may command; and
all these notions of what constitutes wifely conduct are incorporated
with the meaning of the word wife, by the society wherein they
respectively prevail.

Such concepts of rule and status form the _socially-determined_ element
of family life. They are the guaranty of uniformity and recurrence in
the behavior of individuals; they make a social institution of the
family organism which has its origin in an anti-social impulse. The
youth who defies his elders in marrying a girl of his own choice
nevertheless yields to them unconsciously when he expects in his bride
the qualities and behavior they taught him to expect in a good wife.

The ideals are socially-given, but the concrete application to bare fact
is left to the individual to accomplish. The conventional code of
domestic behavior is a tool which husband and wife may use in fashioning
a family organization. It cannot create a family organization; nothing
but the personal activity of husband and wife can do that. Those
families to which husband and wife bring different ideals of domestic
conduct exemplify this fact.

[p.67] Helen, modern and American, marries Henry, old-fashioned and
German. Helen wishes to get a job and live in a better apartment. Henry
believes that women should confine themselves to the three K's, _Kinder,
Kueche, und Kirche_. They dispute about it. Helen complains that Henry
does not earn enough money to enable them to live decently; Henry
replies that Helen is extravagant. When they then go to the divorce
court, the social service worker who looks up the case needs but a
glance to perceive that their socially-determined conceptions of their
respective roles in the family have been so contradictory that they have
been unable to collaborate. Or, as we may put it, the tools society gave
them for home-building were so badly assorted that they could not
construct a satisfactory family.

But suppose they continue to get along nicely together despite their
divergent ideals; they melt into tenderness after every quarrel; they
meet each situation as it comes along, on some matters fight their way
to agreement, on others never reach a compromise. Out of it all they
make a successful marriage. It would be difficult to regard this
successful family as a thing created for these people by society; rather
we would think of it as something they themselves have created, just as
truly as a poem or picture is the creation of the poet or artist. It is
an achievement of creative workmanship.

Social convention sets before us the language which domestic activity
must speak, but not the speaking of the language: society formulates the
meanings which attach to wifehood or parenthood, but does not govern the
expression of these meanings. Society gives to acts their meanings as
symbols, but it does not go behind the sym[p.68]bolic significance nor
control the personal attitudes which the symbols express. If a wife lies
with her husband's guest her act receives its meaning from society. The
Eskimos call it an act of compliance, the Americans an act of rebellion,
just as the syllable _nine_ stands for a cardinal number in English and
its sound equivalent _nein_ for a general negative in German. Yet the
thing which makes or mars family life is not so much the act as the
attitude expressed in the act, not so much overt behavior as personal
motive. Any attitude or motive, be it compliance, rebellion,
appreciation, or resentment, must have as its source a personality; it
cannot originate in society. All that society does is to provide a
medium of expression.

Just as each people has its language, so also each culture has its
domestic institution. Words are not always necessary for communication;
nor is the conventional pattern of a family institution necessary for
domestic life. The deepest uniformities of human thought find universal
expression in laughter or tears, not in words. That aspect of family
life which touches us most nearly may have nothing to do with
institutional forms. Soldiers on foreign soil speak of an "international
language" of sex -- but this is not a socially-given system of symbols;
it is something that wells up from beneath socially-given forms.

Luther used this fact to illustrate the nature of faith: "When husband
and wife are fond of one another, and live together in love and in
confidence in one another, who shall teach them how they should act or
not act, say or not say, think or not think?" Who indeed!

This is a truth which liberates us, and makes us masters [p.69] of our
domestic destiny. Just as any language can be used by poet or
story-teller to create a work of literature, so also any system of
domestic institutions affords symbols for the expression of good
domestic life. Halide Edib has opened the eyes of Westerners to the fact
that the married life of a Turkish woman is not so very different from
the married life of a Western woman.

  [But] when one compared the married Turkish women with the married
  American women . . . one saw that, whatever the laws of society are
  concerning marriage, men and women are home builders by nature and
  they create social units under the name of family and strive to keep
  these units as stable and happy as human nature allows them to be.
  Hence, the position of Turkish women in the family compared not too
  unfavorably with American women, in spite of the legend of fantastic
  harems. . . . The setting was different, the characters varied, but it
  was the some old story. . . .[7]

These remarks should be conned over by all those who represent to us
that they can save the family by tightening divorce laws or loosening
them, by raising the age of consent, by requiring the publication of the
banns, by giving women extensive property rights, by increasing the
penalty for desertion or by legalizing "companionate marriage." Such
changes as these affect the real life of the family only superficially.

It may he that some institutions serve better than others to accomplish
satisfactory family life, just as some languages are better adapted than
others for literary uses. A modification of existing institutions might
or might not provide us with a more useful fabric of symbols [p.70] and
meanings than that which we already possess. Such changes can neither
save nor destroy the family. The important thing about the family is not
its institutional structure, but the use that is made thereof. None of
us stand condemned by our institutional system to lead a thwarted or
unsatisfactory family life.

The critical fact in marriage, in so far as convention is concerned, is,
therefore, the agreement or disagreement of husband and wife upon these
conventions, whatever they may be. The "emancipated woman" and the
"old-fashioned woman" have each an adequate equipment in ideals; each
can work out in her own way a satisfactory life, provided her partner in
marriage is a man who understands and sympathizes with her ideals. When
two who marry have acquired widely different ideals, it is necessary for
them to make a special effort to understand one another. Just as one can
write best in a language with which he is familiar, so they can
construct the best family life who best understand the meaning of each
other's acts and aspirations.

Thus the principle of creative workmanship is applied to family life.
The family organization is created by using social convention as a tool.

The community brings about conformity to its standards, not only by
instilling ideals of conduct in the minds of family members but also by
imposing its will directly upon a household. If husband and wife are
always wrangling and scolding in loud tones, the neighbors will
criticize and ridicule the quarrelsome pair. To avoid this direct,
external pressure, the family can withdraw into itself.

The isolation of the family cannot withdraw it, how[p.71]ever, from the
influence of those ideals of domestic conduct which we have acquired
from the community and which have become a part of ourselves. It can
merely serve to assure us an opportunity to apply these ideals in our
own way. The principle of isolation is thus a corollary of the principle
of creative workmanship.

It sometimes happens, in a crisis of domestic life, that one spouse
appeals to society against the other. The domestic relations court is a
forum especially created to hear such appeals. And every community,
every circle of gossips and story-tellers, is, in effect, an informal
domestic relations court, before which aggrieved wives and husbands lay
their causes and complaints. When an appeal is made to society, whether
formally to a court of law or informally to the moot court of neighbors,
the privacy of the home is sacrificed, and the family ceases to be a
sanctuary within which one can shield himself from the tyranny of the
community. He incurs a heavy responsibility for domestic disaster who
thus lets down the barriers and exposes his home life to the neighbors.

It is inevitable that husband and wife should reckon with their
community, but in this reckoning they must regard themselves as
conspirators who plot together against an opponent, not as litigants who
appear before a judge. They may conspire to impress their neighborhood,
but they must not call it into their house as umpire. "Do not confide
the interior of your home to any one," wrote Diderot to his daughter
upon her marriage, "I do not wish myself to know whatever it would be
that you would tell me; let it then be a mystery to all others."

The principles of creative workmanship and isolation express
respectively the use which the family makes of [p.72] convention, and
the resistance which it offers thereto. These two principles taken
together constitute the principle of autonomy, the principle that each
family is, within a certain range of activity, a law unto itself.

Our analysis of the natural family as a pre-social unit has prepared us
to understand that no social code of domestic behavior could be
exhaustive. Neither the ideals which society subtly instills into its
youth nor the standards of behavior which it overtly enforces upon
families can cover every move and gesture of domestic life. There is
always a field of domestic life which society makes no pretension to
control. Within this margin of freedom husband and wife face each other
unguided, and have their destiny completely in their own hands.

Among those things over which the community exercises no supervision are
included some of the most important marital affairs. As regards coitus,
for instance, conventions require that it shall not be public; beyond
that there is no code. So long as public scandal is avoided and
discussion suppressed, it makes no difference to society whether the sex
life of the family is a matter of violence and rape or of love and
mutual desire. Concerning other matters the community insists on
imposing standards. The neighbors do not permit it to go unchallenged if
the wife takes a job while the husband stays home to mind the baby. In
other civilizations these rules may be drawn differently. Nowhere are
they drawn to cover completely the whole of domestic existence.

We flatter ourselves that our institutions encourage freedom and
expression of personality in marriage, but this is true only in a
relative sense. If our ideals of con[p.73]duct are more vague, and our
rules and conventions more uncertain, it follows therefrom that more
play is left for personality and freedom. But freedom and personality
cannot be a social contribution to family life; they are rather the
consequence of a more complete abdication of society with respect to
domestic affairs. If the family relationship is essentially personal,
this is not due to a dictum of society but is rather a welling up of a
more elementary fact, which derives from a biological situation and not
from social convention.

Thus we return to the deep divergence between the family as a fact in
nature and the family as a social institution. If our fabric of social
rules does not cover everything of importance in family life, this is no
temporary accident. It is not a passing situation due to some
dislocation in modern society and destined to disappear when certain
inconsistencies in our social standards shall have been removed and
certain articles of our code of domestic behavior more fully elaborated.
It is rather due to an incompatibility of the inner nature of society
with the inner nature of the family. The excellence of the former is in
regularity and recurrence and imitation. The excellence of the latter is
in its distinctiveness and originality and creation.

It follows that the important field of domestic activity is precisely
that field which society makes no pretense at ruling. This basic
incompatibility of society and family is reflected in the contradictory
assumptions of sociological thinking on the one hand, and courtship on
the other.

Sociologists since Comte have recognized that in the science of society
"the individual" must be regarded as [p.74] an abstraction, if "society"
is to be regarded as real. There is always a bias in sociological
thinking against attaching importance to the unique and nonrecurrent.
Separate individual facts have meaning in sociology only in so for as
they can stand as symbols for general laws; distinct biological
individuals are of interest only in so far as they participate in the
phenomena of group life.

The academic sociologists are not the only ones who make use of this
type of thinking. Every tourist who visits a foreign country comes back
with a string of stories about the way "they" do things over there. If
he has seen a woman pulling a plow in a field, or a peasant's house
which is shared by some of the live stock, or some example of striking
courtesy or immorality or poverty, he interprets these sights
sociologically. He thinks from the point of view of one who makes a
study of customs. The real importance of the sight of the woman plowing,
to his mind, is that it indicates that all women, or many women, plow in
the fields of the region.

In courtship and marriage, the point of view is the reverse. "The thing
about you and me is that we're so different from the rest!" Is this not
the theme of every courtship? Whereas every study of society, whether it
be by a casual tourist or an academic specialistY proceeds on the
assumption that we do not differ from the rest except in insignificant
details, the lover's thought takes it for granted that the important
things about us are those wherein we differ. This attitude is implicit
in the selective function of mating. When a man says to his "girl
friend," "You are just like the [p.75] other girls," he speaks less as a
lover and more as one making a study of customs.

The same divergence between family and society are evidenced when we
contrast the conception of personality which courtship takes for granted
with that which an observer of society must use. Since society does not
take account of individuals as such, sociology is hampered in its study
of personality. It cannot take account of personality without first
re-defining the term and giving it a special and restricted meaning,
which does not correspond to the meaning we usually give to the word. If
personality is to enter into sociological calculations it must first be
re-defined as "the subjective aspect of culture" (Thomas), and envisaged
as a social product. Here, for instance, is a sociological definition of
personality taken from an introduction to sociology:

  The person is an individual who has status. We come into the world as
  individuals. We acquire status and become persons. Status means
  position in society. The individual inevitably has some status in
  every social group of which he is a member.[8]

Such definitions serve to obscure but not to overcome the
incompatibility of personality and society, and the limitations of
sociological theory. Even after sociology has newly defined personality
as individual plus status, it is still limited in that it can only
explain and describe so much of a person's conduct as reflects his
status; it cannot explain or describe conduct that reflects
individuality.

The amateur sociologist touring Europe falls into a [p.76] similar way
of thinking. If he strolls along the quay at Naples he is looking for
types of fishermen or beggar girls; he sees them as individuals with
status. And so it is with nine-tenths of the persons we meet: we think
of them in connection with their position in the community. We see the
iceman and the mayor's wife and the high school principal. Their
position seems to he an important part of them, whereby we identify them
in our minds.

But in a love affair another way of thinking prevails. The rationale of
biological selectivity requires it. In courtship and marriage such
expressions as "I love you for yourself alone" imply a conception of
personality diametrically opposed to that which a student of society
must use. From the standpoint of sociology the lover's concept seems
mystical; from the standpoint of courtship the sociologists' concept
seems unreal.

It is difficult here to do justice to the intricacy of our way of
thinking. Of course the lover is seen by his beloved to have his status
as lover, the wife is seen by her husband to have the wifely status. But
the mind quickly passes beyond the consideration of status and dwells
more intently upon the unmeasurable and inexpressible fact of
personality, which alone gives rise to everything that is of importance
in family life.

The principle of autonomy makes it seem obvious that it cannot be an aim
of domestic life merely to conform to convention. Conformity to
convention can be only a means to an end. If we say of our Bohemian
friends that in their family life they are "unconventional" we are
adverting to a conspicuous but none the less unimportant aspect of their
domestic life. It is as if we [p.77] should describe their new car by
saying that it bears no license plates, and leave unsaid whether it is a
Ford or a Cadillac, whether it runs well or ill.

The significant facts of family life are worked out in an inner domain
where social influence does not reach. The external resemblance of one
family to another is not a matter of importance. For families do not
duplicate each other in their essential structure. Each family works out
for itself, beyond the range of convention, some peculiar way of life.
This sell-organization, whatever it may be, is the one thing that really
matters in terms of human life.

[p.78]

JUST as the examination of _convention_ revealed an antithesis between
family and society, so also an analysis of _authority_ clarifies the
distinction between family and State.

Occidental families find that the problem of authority in the home is
already posed for them in the words of the marriage service which
require that one spouse promise to obey the other. The wedding customs
of other peoples may be less specific in referring to domination of one
partner over the other, but usually there is some standard pattern of
authority and subordination to which families are expected to conform.
But families do not conform to these patterns. A strong-willed American
girl who has commanded her fiancé in every crisis and prevailed in every
decision may promise as a matter of form to obey him, but no one is
misled by the promise, least of all the husband and wife. Among
primitive peoples who consecrate the authority of the male with all the
machinery of rigorous custom at their command, the women with their
teasing and giggling and singing of pointed songs are far from being
completely dominated.

Can there be a definite allocation of authority in a family
organization? Folklore and table are full of the discussion of this moot
point. The situation in which [p.79] one spouse dominates while seeming
to submit is an unfailing theme of humorous narrative.

There is for instance the anecdote of the philosopher who set out to
prove that throughout the whole country no man was lord of his own
household. He took with him two horses, a gray and a bay, and gave out
word that to any man who was sole ruler at his home he would freely give
one of the horses as a reward. He went from one farmstead to another,
repeating his inquiry and offer. Since these were simple, honest folk,
the husbands all told him truly that they were often checked and
governed by their wives and in this their wives confirmed them. Finally
he encountered a canny farmer who asserted that he alone was ruler in
his house. His wife, a sharp-faced woman, bore out his statement and
owned that it was the truth. Whereupon the philosopher told him to
choose a horse, either the gray or the bay.

The farmer looked the horses over carefully. "I think I'll take the
bay."

The philosopher began to untie the bay, and while he was thus engaged
the farmer talked in low tones to his wife. Then, having spoken with her
no more than a moment, he called out to the philosopher, "Hold, sir, I
think I will take the gray." But the philosopher, laughing, drove away
with both horses, and returned gladly to his home, having proved that
which he had set out to demonstrate.

Recently John Macy reported the results of a similar amateur
investigation. He had inquired of his married friends whether in a
crisis the husband or the wife prevailed. His friends were inclined to
regard the question [p.80] as inconclusive if not actually foolish. His
report bore the stinging title, "The Two-Headed Monster, the Family."
From the point of view of one who seeks to know definitely where
authority resides, the family is monstrous indeed.

But why should we wish to know where authority in the family is
centered? The question is one which implies that the family is a
miniature State. It carries over to the discussion of domestic affairs
that doctrinaire difficulty which attends the so-called juridical theory
of the State, namely, the search for sovereignty, for a supreme
will-determining organ of the political group.

Kinship organizations are often political in character. The community
sometimes holds the head of a household responsible for the conduct and
debts of its members; the laws of republican Rome gave to the
_paterfamilias_ complete authority over the lives and property of his
descendants and their wives. It is noteworthy that the kinship groups
which have so strongly marked a political character are usually larger
than the natural family. In any case, this aspect of the organization of
the family is only one of the many conventional characteristics which
society imposes on the family by means of pressure from without, or
introduces from within by inculcating ideals of conduct. It is only as
an institution, not as a fact in nature, that the family has any
standardized organization of authority. It is formally impossible for
the State to exist without sovereignty, but the family can lead a
vigorous life without making use of any will-determining organ
whatsoever.

Much of the life of the family goes on without the making of corporate
decisions. The husband may do [p.81] something of which the wife does
not approve; the wife may do something contrary to the husband's wishes.
Neither of them is expressing the collective will of the family in his
act. And yet his act is part of a complex of action which fills domestic
life.

Certainly there are some questions which the family must definitely
decide, one way or the other. It is not difficult to envisage the making
of these decisions as if it were a kind of political process. Here the
father initiates a move and the mother has veto power; there the supreme
authority is a council in which the two eldest children have a voice but
no vote. F.P.A. printed in his column in the New York _World_ a
political analysis of a family campaign to buy a Buick sedan. Says the
father:

  "At a caucus of my faction held last night at dinner the situation was
  fraught with suspense. My wife, heroine of many similar campaigns,
  indorsed the Huick, but my favorite son Joe aligned himself with the
  irreconcilables. In his keynote speech he demanded a Darmon."

  "Which way did your daughter Betty swing?"

  "She is in the doubtful column. Her sister Bab is also on the fence.
  It is my youngest, Connie, who threw the bomb-shell into the
  convention. She was not expected to loom very large on the horizon.
  But it seems now that she occupies a pivotal position and I fear she
  may be a deciding factor in the conflict. She is standing pat for an
  imported model."

  "The outlook is hardly encouraging."

  "Far from it. But I intend to marshal my forces. Betty and Bab can be
  won over and instructed. That will give my cohorts an overwhelming
  plurality. When Joe sees which way the wind is blowing he will change
  his stand and lie low until next year. Thus Connie will find herself
  the standardbearer of a lost cause and will be forced to capitulate."
  [p.82] If the family existed primarily as an instrument for
  formulating decisions upon matters of policy, the political-theory
  analysis of the domestic situation would be useful and valid. If the
  principal problems of domestic life were problems of deciding upon a
  common line of action, then it would be obvious that the structure of
  the family was ill-adapted for the solving of its problems, and John
  Macy might fairly use the epithet "Two-Headed Monster" in writing of
  the family. It cannot be disputed that the modern Occidental family is
  in fact two-headed, but it is only from the specialized viewpoint of
  political theory that this two-headedness is monstrous.

In our political way of thinking we attribute to the State one single
psychological quality -- a will. We regard the State as an artificial
person, endowed with volitional unity, and equipped with a specialized
organ or _sovereign_ which determines its will. The Crown in Parliament
expresses the will of the British State by making laws and directing
administrative policies.

But that a community of men are endowed with a common will is perhaps
more a fiction and a metaphor than a description of objective truth. As
Willoughby, dean of American political theorists, concedes in his
discussion of the _Fundamental Concepts of Public Law_, this theory of
the State "may start with any premise that it is deemed useful to assume
. . . an attempt to examine their abstract validity would be as devoid
of meaning as to question whether it is correct to use _x_ or _y_ to
indicate the unknown quantity in an algebraic expression. . . .
Analytical political philosophy does not attempt the statement of
metaphysically correct propositions. The essential juristic qualities
which it predicates [p.83] of the State are not supposed to correspond
to substantive qualities which, ontologically speaking, inhere in the
State and in law."

There is no quarrel with the political theorists if they find it useful
to attribute a metaphysical common personality to the State. But it is
clear that the family can have no such unitary personality, to which a
unitary will can attach. For the family is made up of a number of
distinct and complete personalities which in the nature of things cannot
be merged.

If we think of an individual in one capacity only (for example, his
political capacity) then it is possible to imagine that relative to that
particular capacity or range of activity there has been a merging of his
will in some larger will. But when we think of a complete personality,
then such a merging of one will in another is inconceivable and
self-contradictory.

The wife who attempts to make complete submission to her husband
diminishes the personal character of her marriage relationship. If it
were psychologically possible for her completely to annihilate her own
will, or to merge it in her husband's, her relationship with her husband
would cease to be a personal one. Such perfect self-effacement, however
it be studied and pursued, can never be achieved. But even to attempt
its achievement is monstrous and abnormal. The promise to obey in
marriage, when seriously meant, intends not the suicide but rather the
dedication of a personality and will. The tie of personality and the
distinction of persons in marriage can be rendered less important (in so
far as mechanical submission obtains), but it cannot be effaced.

It is in a sense paradoxical that the family, in which [p.84] the most
complete intimacies of life are possible, should none the less be so
constituted that we must regard its members as forever distinct in
personality and will -- and hence forever in a state of tension. This is
the paradox which, as Keyserling has pointed out, makes of marriage a
fundamentally tragic situation.

Herein we discover the most profound difference between the domestic and
the political conception of the family. Whenever we are confronted with
a number of individual things and it is required that we grasp them
collectively, our minds reach at once for some metaphor or symbol by
which we can reduce the diversity to unity, and envisage the many as
one. So it is with the many citizens of at State and with the separate
members of a family. The symbols which fulfill these purposes in
political theory are all of a type which involves the merging of an
aspect or capacity of individuals in a higher metaphysical unity. There
is the symbol of the organism, which we establish by envisaging the
individuals as organs having functions, and being defined by the
functions they perform; there is the symbol of sovereignty which we
create by deducing from the unity of a rational system of law the
existence of a unitary and rational lawgiver in whose being men as legal
creatures are merged, or before whom all bow down; there is also the
symbol of the group mind, which we form by inferring from observed
similarities in the thoughts and feelings of many individuals the
existence of some super-personal mind in the processes of which the
individuals participate, but with which they are not wholly identified.

We cannot use such symbols as these in envisaging the unity of the
family because the personality of the [p.85] family relationship makes
them inapplicable.[9] Count Keyserling suggests that we conceive the
unity of the family by means of a more appropriate metaphor: the
elliptical field of force.

  . . . the life-form of marriage must possess a special and independent
  significance. Love, propagation and self-preservation can only act as
  components. Within its domain of isolation the ego must be
  fundamentally secured. Such a conception of higher unity is actually
  realizable: _it corresponds exactly with an elliptical field of
  force_. The latter has two loci which are fixed and never can be
  merged in one another; its interpolar tension cannot be abolished if
  the field is to remain intact. The interpolar tension is at the same
  time an independent unit created by the field of force itself. This
  unit cannot be deduced from the specific character of each pole, taken
  separately or together, or from any other possible relation existing
  between the two. In the very same sense marriage represents an
  independent unit over and above each partner and his particular
  impulse.[10]

Keyserling's metaphor of _polarity_, used to define the nature of the
family, has this virtue: that it keeps clearly before us the fact that
personalities cannot be merged. The writer who describes the family as a
"two-headed monster" was unconsciously presenting to us not a faulty or
accidental character of a debased or disorganized family but the
essential and universal character of the family in all times. The
separateness of the spouses is an excellence, not a blemish, in married
life. In the [p.86] words which Kahlil Gibran's Prophet addressed to
husbands and wives:

  . . . Let there be spaces in your togetherness
  And let the winds of the heavens dance between you.
  Love one another, but make not a bond of love:
  Let it be rather a moving sect between the shores of your souls.
  Fill each other's cup but drink not from the same cup.
  Give one another your bread but eat not from the same loaf.
  Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each or you be alone,
  Even as the strings of a lute are alone though they quiver with the
  same music.
  Give your hearts, but not into each other's keeping.
  For only the hand of Life can contain your hearts.
  And stand together yet not too near together:
  For the pillars of the temple stand apart
  And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other's shadow.[11]

A continuous cycle of tension and accommodation characterizes the inner
life of the family. In the dialectics of courtship conflicts are the
rule rather than an exception. After marriage, the home furnishes an
arena for the contest of wills. Those who marry are seldom blind to the
probabilities of differences and disputes between themselves. The
prospect of future tension between them has tremendous reality to them.
They speculate upon the way that they will settle future quarrels. But
the doctrinaire solution: that one is to rule and the other to obey, is
really no solution at all. If indeed the bride and groom have been
educated to believe that one of them must be master and the other slave,
the subordinate [p.87] partner simply works out a technique of cajolery
and persuasion which is more subtle but no less effective than an
outright and independent willfulness.

The laws of domestic tension are not the laws of political dominion. The
two differ in method and principle. In family life it is often the
weakest who has his way, and this by reason of the weakness itself. The
willful child or the childish adult, the bedridden invalid or the
nervous housewife often becomes the tyrant before whom the stronger
willed and better balanced members of the family habitually give way.

A contest of wills in domestic life is often a competition in
irritability. For the family cannot, like the State, run roughshod over
the personality of its members. At least the family cannot do so with
impunity. The object of the State, as Machiavelli profoundly observed,
is to perdure without limit of time. No one human life, be it even the
life of the Prince, measures the life ambition of the State. But the
natural family has its life-term meted out to it by the lives of its
primary members. The State can sacrifice the individual and still attain
its object; the family can offer up no such sacrifices. The family must
therefore adjust itself to personal frailties which the State would
disdain to take account of. Chronic resentments and repeatedly injured
feelings can poison family life and continue to poison it as long as the
family lasts. There is no getting rid of the poison except by making
personal adjustments -- or extinguishing the family. Making a "personal
adjustment," after all (however smooth and inoffensive the words may
sound), is nothing more or less than doing what some one else wants you
to do.

[p.88] It has been established that personal interaction is a necessary
characteristic of the natural family, and that this interaction is in
some degree independent of social convention. It now appears, when the
structure of the family is examined from the point of view of authority,
that this interaction has the character of a tension between two
independent wills. The tension of domestic life is continuous, but not
necessarily unpleasant. It involves conflict, but not necessarily
hostility. It may take the form of competitive benevolence. The seeming
paradox that there should be conflict without hostility is explained by
the peculiar status of self-interest in family life. For loving and
cherishing in family life are more significant than obeying.

[p.89]

IN our conscious life ideas of self-interest are usually more sharply
defined than ideas of convention and authority. People meditate upon
their interests, but as to the social atmosphere in which they find
themselves, or the political authority under which they live, these they
accept without intensive application of thought. This conscious
preoccupation with interests is perhaps a peculiarity of the Western
mind; there is evidence that some peoples are less disposed to do their
thinking from the standpoint of personal advantage. Even in Occidental
civilization there is never such absolute concentration of attention
upon self-interest as was attributed by nineteenth century economists to
humanity in general. The fact remains, however, that the point of view
of self-interest is an important one, and that it is raised in domestic
life every time there arises in the mind the thought of "What do _I_ get
out of it?" or "What is there in it for _me?"_

What is there in marriage for any one? To answer that question
completely, taking account of all its implications, requires nothing
less than a complete doctrine of family life. Every thesis and postulate
of domestic theory as herein developed must be brought to bear, more or
less directly, upon the advantage to self of entering upon marriage and
family responsibilities. There is moreover [p.90] a more restricted
purpose which can be followed out within the confines of a single
chapter: just as the doctrines of sociology and political theory were
laid under contribution to supply information as to the nature of the
family, so also the doctrines of classical economics can be drawn upon
to serve the same end.

The principles and method of economics can be brought to bear upon the
problem of self-interest in the family only on condition that these
principles are understood in their broadest possible sense. It is not
economics as a science of the appropriation of material things, nor the
new, nonpsychological, statistical economics, but economics as a way of
stating psychologically the problem of conflict of interest that will he
useful in the analysis of the domestic situation.

The familiar dictum that "economics has to do with making a living" is
after all an inadequate statement of the scope and application of
classical economic theory. The greater part of its content does not
relate to the primitive processes which are actually necessary to the
maintenance of human life, but to the operation of a certain intricate
system which correlates innumerable activities of civilized man. Most of
these activities relate only indirectly to alimentation and warmth --
the brute facts of getting a living. The facts which economics sets
before us have a maximum of meaning in the business of the stockbroker.
The "natural economy" of primitive peoples hardly constitutes a subject
matter for economic theory of any kind, and is usually relegated to the
attention of anthropologists.

The brute physical fact that men require food and warmth in order to
live is so pervasive that no social [p.91] study ignores it. Economic
theory is not alone in giving attention to this fact; sociology and
political theory must also take it into account. None of these studies,
however, can give exclusive attention to these physiological necessities
of life. Such facts as postage stamp collecting, musical entertainment,
travel for culture, or rivalry in fashionable dress are related to
"getting a living" by only the most tenuous connection. These are
matters which in themselves are far more fruitfully studied by the
method of sociology than by the method of economics. Nevertheless,
economics finds a place for them, just as sociology finds a place for
the fact that man must get a living. Economics is distinguished from the
other social studies not so much by any special preoccupation with
getting a living as by certain theoretical postulates which it takes for
granted in the study of human conduct. These presuppositions, which
distinguish economic theory from other theories, are the following:

  1.  That there are individuals having desires
  2.  That these ends or desires are at present competitive (_i.e._,
      that they have magnitude on a scale common to a number of
      individuals).
  3.  That the interaction between the individuals with respect to these
      desires produces a common resultant, which follows automatically
      from the competition of the individuals, and can be stated
      relationally.

The first presupposition is the _economic man;_ the second is the
_economic good;_ the third is the _market_ or _economic system_.

It matters not who is conceived as the "individual" so long as he seeks
his own end. Classical economics takes [p.92] the natural man as the
individual, but other economic theories speak of classes, nations,
communities, or corporations as the true individuals of economics.
Anomalies sometimes result when different conceptions of the
"individual" are confused in the same argument (as when one infers that
whatever benefits England must benefit all Englishmen), but any
conception of the individual is valid in deducing: an economic theory.
Even the family can be regarded as an individual in such a deduction.

Moreover, it makes no difference what it may be that the individuals
seek as their aim, so long as it is competitive. They may seek for glory
or Japanese prints or potatoes. The Tlingit and Haida Indians of the
Northwest American coast strive to excel each other in giving away their
property so as to keep each other under a maximum social obligation.
This is the _potlach_ institution, fundamentally economic. In modern
capitalist society the individuals usually strive to acquire as much
money or property as possible, and therefore the greater part of our
modern economic theory corresponds to what Aristotle would have called
_chrematistics_, the art of money-making. There is no ethical limitation
as to the nature of an economic desire. Mere thermo-dynamic "efficiency"
is the only intrinsic ethic of an economic system; aside from this,
economics is ethically blind. And if there are associated with domestic
life any pleasures or satisfactions which can be measured on a common
scale, those can stand as the goods of an economic theory.

Moreover, the economic individual must not only have an appropriate
desire, but must also be aware of the magnitude of his desire. He must
not only want some[p.93]thing for which he must compete, but he must
know how much he wants it. Knowing this, he places himself in the
market, along with other men who are equally familiar with the magnitude
of their desires. And then, however the rules of the market or economic
system may be drawn up, an operation of selection and substitution takes
place by which the desires of individuals are satisfied in varying
degrees. This is a highly generalized statement of classical economic
theory. If the desire is for money, and the rules of the market are
those which prevail in a capitalistic world, then our familiar textbook
type of economic theory can be deduced from these postulates.

Granting these three assumptions, any number of economic theories can be
deduced from them. Buyer can always meet seller in a market, supply and
demand can match each other, consumer and producer have their interests
adjusted, and all the complex calculus of marginism will be manifested.
We can draw upon our imaginations for a great variety of economic
system$, each explained by its own theory, just as it is possible to
imagine a variety of geometries. Capitalist economics and Euclidean
geometry happen to be the most familiar and the most useful to us, but
other theories of economics and other geometries are worthy of study.
The economics of postage stamp collecting is probably distinct from
capitalist economics generally, because the usual economic rule that the
latest increment of goods is less valued than earlier increments is
reversed in the collecting of stamps; additional postage stamps have
constantly increasing value to the owner as his collection nears
completeness -- which it never attains. Thorstein Veblen has given us an
[p.94] amusing new economic doctrine in his theory of the leisure class.
We might draw up an economic theory for hermits and saints in which
there would be competition for poverty rather than for wealth, and
whereby we would discover a marginal saint whose austerities were just
sufficient to bring him recognition.

There are three ways in which the concepts of economics can be applied
to the study of the family. First, we can regard the family as an
economic individual; or we can treat the separate family members as
economic individuals and think of them as seeking some "good" which
inheres in family life; or, third, we can regard the family as an
economic system in itself.

The hypothesis that the family is an economic individual is familiar to
us through the writers who discuss the so-called "economic functions" of
the family. When the housewife spins and weaves and the children work on
the farm, the family is a productive unit. When the wife and children do
nothing at all but spend father's money, the family is still a consuming
unit. In both cases it can be regarded as an economic individual, which
is rich or poor, successful or unsuccessful, compared with other
families in the economic system.

We can learn very little about the nature of the family from this
hypothesis. It may or may not be true that a family which has some
clear-cut position as a unit in the economic system displays a more
satisfactory family life on that account. The husband and wife who share
the work of a farm may or may not enjoy a better domestic existence than
the city-dwelling couple who work in different offices and take their
meals out. There is not any proof that the decay of household industries
which fol[p.95]lowed the industrial revolution sapped the foundations of
family life. There is no evidence that a home is a better home if it is
also a little factory and a little restaurant.

Moreover, the wealth or poverty of one family as compared with another
is not an index of its domestic excellence. It is notorious that a
wealthy family is not necessarily a good family, and that poverty may
increase family solidarity. Dr. Hamilton in his research found no
correlation between wealth and marital satisfaction. A family can pass
from wealth to poverty or from poverty to wealth without impairing or
improving the quality of its domestic life. Here we can see that poverty
is a cause of failure, there we can see it as a cause of success. The
fortune of the family as a unit in the economic system is an element of
the external environment only, and not of the inner nature, of the
family. This is the fact which we feel in the words of the marriage
service and which gives the phrase, "for richer, for poorer" its
significance.

If we regard the family members as the "economic individuals" and think
of them as seeking, each for himself, and in competition with others,
some kind of a good which marriage provides, we have the elements of a
sound theory of courtship and divorce -- the origin and dissolution of
families -- but not yet the elements of a theory of normal family life.

Let us imagine that the delights or benefits of family life are
apprehended by individuals on a quantitative scale, so that marriage
will seem to be worth exactly so much but no more, and a prospective
bride or groom will be valued at just so much sacrifice but no more. Two
clearly economic questions will then formulate themselves: whether to
marry, and whom to marry. Does the [p.96] advantage of the married state
exceed that of the unmarried state? If so, marry. Marriage competes as
an occupation with other occupations. The woman of the Middle Ages chose
between home and convent; the woman of today may make the choice between
family and career. Pantagruel debated painfully whether it was worth
while to marry at all.

This question whether to marry is usually associated definitely with the
question of whom to marry. Each marriageable individual competes with
every other for a mate. Each seeks to secure for himself the most
advantageous alliance that is possible. Where marriage is by purchase
this competition is on a monetary basis; elsewhere the elusive
imponderabilia of courtship are thrown into the scale. But always the
situation is one of economics: there is competition in a market, and the
possibility of substitution. The thought is always present that if the
other man is better than this one, he would be taken and this one given
up; if the career is more advantageous, it must be preferred to
marriage. Then if the moment arrives when two people cease to weigh and
balance the possibility of renouncing each other or their marriage, they
are withdrawn from competition, from the market, from the possibility of
substitution. Their situation is no longer economic, and economic theory
no longer explains it. Their relationship becomes a personal one, which
falls outside the scope of economics because in personal relationships
there can be no transferring or substitution.

According to the genial theory of marriage which we have called the
tomcat theory, this moment never comes. Even after marriage, the
competitive situation of courtship continues. The wife competes
continuously with all [p.97] other women for her husband's love, and the
husband with all other men for his wife's loyalty. This competition, if
it exists, is the fundamental _economic_ tension of marriage

So long as this economic tension continues in marriage, divorce is
always envisaged as the ultimate limit of competition. If the married
state comes to seem sufficiently burdensome or unattractive, or if
another person comes to be regarded as sufficiently more appealing than
one's mate, divorce has the character of a simple economic act, and is
equivalent to a sale in monetary economics. Divorce is the consummitory
economic act which bears witness to the persistence of a market
situation in marriage.

So long as a family exists, the market situation is hostile to its
well-being. A wife or husband can separate from his family just as an
employee can leave the firm which employs him, and for reasons which are
fundamentally the same: that he is offered better employment elsewhere.
But the consequences of these acts are very different, for if the
employee quits his job, the factory simply hires another man, while if
the husband gets a divorce, the family is extinguished. This is, of
course, a result of the fact that family relationships are personal and
hence nontransferable.

Finally we can regard the family as an economic system in itself,
existing in isolation from all other economic systems. Within this
system the members are the economic individuals, and certain distinctive
domestic services constitute the economic goods. These services have no
proper currency beyond the limits of the family itself. It is a
dangerous and disruptive procedure to attempt to [p.98] commute them for
the values of the outside world. The anomalous nature of such an attempt
is evident when a wife sues for alienation of her husband's affections,
or when a law is proposed requiring that the husband pay wages to the
wife for her housekeeping.

What are these intimate domestic services which have no currency outside
the isolated domestic system, and which are not to be commuted into the
goods of another economic world? Here economic theory is indifferent,
but sociology has an answer prepared. These services are defined in each
society by its domestic institutions. They are implied in the socially
established meanings of family membership. They are a part of the
language of domestic life, which each civilization formulates for
itself. In Occidental society, coitus is such a service; among the
veiled Turkish women personal beauty was a service confined to one's own
home. A debate is now in progress in the Western world as to whether
housekeeping is properly an intimate domestic service, or whether it is
rather to be regarded as an article of commerce. If it is regarded as an
intimate service, then any scheme by which a husband pays a wife for her
housekeeping is merely a convenient device for budgeting time or money,
for keeping accounts or fixing responsibility within the household
organization, and does not make of the wife's duties an article of
commerce in the outside market. But if housekeeping is not regarded as
an intimate domestic service, then a wife who finds that she can make
more money as a sales manager than it would cost to hire her housework
done may seek outside employment as freely as she might look for a
better apartment or change her milkman. [p.99] The method of economics
has taught us something of the external environment of a family, and
something of the way in which families come into existence or pass away.
Here it conforms to that which sociological doctrine has already
revealed, that the family is an isolated thing; it withdraws itself from
the rest of the world; it has its history and its values which it cannot
safely share outside its close-drawn limits. The primitive urge which
drives two lovers to forsake companions and sit silently together
forecasts the creation of something in which they alone can share and in
which no outsider can participate. In most marriage ceremonies there
comes the symbolic moment when the married pair flees, or the guests
withdraw and leave them to themselves. In most civilizations it is
recognized that this isolation is worthy of protection -- hence the
mother-in-law joke. Hence also the familiar tragedy of conflicting
loyalties to the mate on the one hand and the parents on the other. For
an attempt to render the distinctive domestic services outside of the
limits of the family, even if it does not result in disaster, is certain
to result in confusion. Our society (unlike a patriarchal society) has
so defined the intimate services of domestic life that any newly married
pair attempting to live in the household of a parent is courting
domestic disaster.

If the family is thus isolated and autonomous, with its own set of
values, one cannot intelligently measure his own interest and advantage
in family life without understanding these values.

At the end of this labyrinth of thought, we come upon a conception of
the family which is satisfying to the mind [p.100] as well as to the
heart. The two who have been planning their future together agree that
the family is for them not an institution given them by society but a
situation given them by nature. It consists of a man and a woman
together, and possibly a child. They have inspected this conception from
different points of view, and each inspection has revealed to them a
sound reason for believing certain things which they have wished to
believe but which previously they had been unable to prove. Political
theory taught them that the merging of their personalities is not
properly an object of their domestic life; sociology verified their
suspicion that real excellence in family life lies beyond social
control, and requires more than mere conformity; economics confirmed
their feeling that in setting up their family they are in a very real
way cutting themselves off from competition with the rest of the world
and creating a system of values for themselves alone. The family which
they are to establish is too personal to be merely a political unit, too
spontaneous to be merely a social institution, too isolated to be a mere
organ of the economic system; it is something independently rooted in
nature itself. Thus they have drawn up their definition of the family.

[p.101]

WHEN two young things promise to love and to cherish one another, they
take for granted the existence in human nature of a capacity for loving
and cherishing. And each as regards the other is chiefly interested in
that; one aspect of the other's nature. Will he love me always? How much
does he love me now? These perennial questions reveal the natural form
which the thought of the newly married assumes. It is a sound intuition
which fixes upon this quality of human nature as the most important in
connection with domestic problems This quality is so worthy of special
study that we will give it a special name. We will call it the
psychological equipment of the domestic man (_homo domesticus_).

The social sciences have adopted a convenient method for studying the
general effect of any given trait in human nature. They create for
purposes of inquiry a fictitious man whose psychological endowment
consists of just such qualities as are pertinent to their investigation.
The most distinguished of these creations is, of course, the economic
man (_homo oeconomicus_) who knows only the motives of self-interest and
whose intellect is able to measure with incredible exactness the
intensity of all of his desires. Less well known is the political man,
whom Catlin presents to us. The intelligence testers have [p.102]
brought forth a psychological man whose nature is completely revealed in
the answers he gives to lists of prepared questions. No careful thinker
makes the mistake of confounding these abstractions with the facts of
nature. It is perfectly apparent that a real man is neither the economic
abstraction of pure self-interest nor the political abstraction of pure
will to dominion nor the psychological abstraction of pure
"intelligence." Yet these abstractions are useful, and we would not know
what to do without them. Taken together, they constitute a little
menagerie of fabulous beasts. Into this interesting and useful menagerie
it is permissible to introduce a new creature -- the domestic man, whose
sole quality of mind and heart is an ability to love and to cherish.

What is meant by loving and cherishing? What are these qualities which
we deem so important in the life of the family?

The kind of account we will give of these qualities depends upon whether
we confine our attention to their conscious manifestations or try to
trace them back to some unconscious process out of which they can be
said to arise. Since the object of formulating these principles of
marriage is to establish a pattern for conscious purposive conduct,
these qualities must be studied in their conscious form, although their
derivation from nonconscious elements may be recognized.

They derive from two primitive and beautiful attitudes -- the attitude
of a male and female toward each other as their lives are joined in a
new life, and the attitude of the protecting parent toward a dependent
child. Both of these love-attitudes enter into the character of the
domestic man.

[p.103] When these primitive love-attitudes are interpreted according to
the requirements of a religious cult, a social code, or an intellectual
interest, many variant conceptions of love result -- there is for
instance the disembodied "pure" love which derives from the worship of
the Virgin, the love-service ideal of medieval chivalry, and Platonic
love which expresses itself in the contemplation of an ideal.

These variants of the love concept are products of a certain amount of
sophistication and discipline. They do not flow directly from natural
impulse. We cannot witness their analogues in the behavior of the higher
animals. They represent special qualities of love in a given time and
place and not the universal quality of love everywhere. They describe
aspects of culture or civilization rather than aspects of human nature.
They always threaten to cause a misunderstanding of the real nature of
love, and to establish in hierarchic order a series of different kinds
of love, from love of the body to love of the soul.

The distinction between "sacred" and "profane" love, between pure love
and animal passion, between natural love and sophisticated love, is a
dangerous distinction to introduce into marriage. It is a distinction
unknown to the domestic man. And yet it is often introduced, in the
Western World, under the influence of the Puritan tradition. The
psychoanalysts describe it as a dissociation phenomenon in which the sex
aspect of love is dissociated from the tenderness aspect.

It is a distinction which can do no good at all, but which can work
infinite harm. There is always plenty of [p.104] ways, but no beautiful
love relationship between man and wife can be based on the repression or
contempt of sex.

Love can be spiritual if it does not denounce the flesh or regard the
body as unclean; it can rise to great heights of beauty if it does not
destroy its own foundations in nature. A bride who thinks of loving and
cherishing as something ethereal, and of sex as something vile, must
either change her mind or endanger her marriage. Most of them, according
to Dr. Hamilton, change their minds. The real and important distinction
which must be made by lovers is the distinction between personal and
impersonal love. The impersonal love for mankind which Christian ethics
requires is the antithesis of the personal love which marriage demands.
Humanitarianism, brotherly love, altruism, philanthropy -- all these
sentiments are rivals and even enemies of the jealous personal
attachment which draws two lovers together. The oft recurrent tragedy of
the man torn between love for his family and devotion to a cause is
evidence of the wide disparity between these two kinds of loving and
cherishing.

The capacity to love and to cherish which we ascribe to domestic man is
necessarily an aptitude for personal rather than impersonal devotion.
This is logically implied in the definition of the family as something
that consists of determinate members, and in the description of the
relationship of personality which unites the members of a family. Quite
aside from formal logical requirements, the voices of all lovers would
insist that this and nothing else, is the special quality which they
demand in their beloved. Loving and cherishing in domes[p.105]tic life
is a personal affair, an outgrowth of the natural functions of sex and
parenthood.

This kind of loving and cherishing is at its source common to man and
beast. It need not be expressed in words nor formulated in thought. It
is more primitive than logic, and anterior even to consciousness. But
when the light of consciousness is thrown upon it and the schematization
of logic is applied to it, it is very clearly a personal attitude. An
ego is the source of object-love; a person is its object.

Loving and cherishing, being acts that arise in one person and are
directed toward another, have both an active and a passive aspect. They
involve motives on the one hand, and feelings on the other. The motives
and feelings are of a special type which must be assumed to be present
in the domestic man.

Just as it has been necessary to borrow from the social sciences in
analyzing various aspects of the family, so now it is appropriate to
make use of psychological theory in the domestic view of human nature.
It is necessary here to defend the idea that the domestic man's behavior
proceeds from motion and then to classify and analyze the motives from
which it proceeds.

In a period of intellectual adventure and experiment, such as the
present, there comes a time when service can be done by stating
emphatically facts that are perfectly obvious and insisting
categorically upon the recognition of truths that are already accepted.
In this spirit it is appropriate to assert that there are such things as
motives and purposes, and that human behavior is sometimes motivated or
purposive. This is a view so much in accord with our commonsense
interpretation of things that some [p.106] psychologists regard it as a
perversely unsophisticated notion.

Psychologists object to motives because there is no experimental proof
that a motive corresponds to any psychophysical fact; what we call
motive may be merely afterthought, or, as they say, "rationalization".
This objection would be regarded as mere pettifogging if motives could
be measured exactly or analyzed statistically. But motives are
notoriously ill-adapted for use as objects of science. They have quality
and quantity, but their quality cannot be reduced to any quantitative
terms nor their quantity measured on any known scale. Psychology lets
them go with a sigh of relief, for it suspects all introspective data.
"Since the rise of the experimental method in psychology there has been
little if any room in the field for the study of the human individual
when he performs what may be very definitely and accurately called
purposive actions."[12] Since Kantor wrote these lines, two significant
books on motives have appeared: Thomson's _Springs of Human Action_
(1927) and Troland's _Fundamentals of Human Motivation_ (1928). Thomson
is clearly a pioneer in the analysis of these things; Troland's work is
more thorough.

There are other fields of thought from which the concept of motive
cannot be dismissed so easily. If we are trying to get human behavior
into a rational system such as ethics or law, not attempting to
correlate it with a physiological or sociological process, then the
existence of motives must be assumed; otherwise ethical systems and
codes of criminal law are irrational.

[p.107] And yet it is clear that not all behavior is motivated. Thomson
uses "motive" to mean all factors moving to conduct, but most writers
use the term to mean a conscious and purposive element in the
determining of behavior. "Motivated behavior belongs to that most
complicated of all behavior modes . . . in which the person is not only
a part of the stimulus reaction but the main stimulus." (Kantor.) To
illustrate: In the ordinary reflex action situation the stimulus is
external, as light striking the eye, but in motivated behavior the
principal stimulus is the total personality of the actor, as when
Napoleon decides to return from Elba. It would be a grotesque
description of Napoleon's decision if we should say that the arrival of
newspapers from France at Elba operated to bring about the departure of
Napoleon from exile in the same way that the light striking the eye
operates to contract the pupil. Kantor lists in hierarchic order five
modes of action as follows:

  1.  Automatic (Actions not remembered, anaesthesia, stupor, coma,
      etc.)
  2.  Subreactionalistic (Individual concentrated on stimulus but action
      not sharply pointed; habit reactions often in this class.)
  3.  Reactionalistic (This includes the "flash of genius" type of
      behavior.)
  4.  Subpersonalistic (This includes the reactions of the person as
      represented by his likes, tastes, abilities, etc.)
  5.  Personalistic ("Whenever there is some problem of advantage or
      disadvantage"; all motivated or purposive behavior.)

[p.108] The intimate connection between motives on the one hand and
personality on the other is attested in Occidental thinking whenever
human behavior is ascribed to "social forces" rather than to the agency
of an individual person. When action is not attributed to a person, the
motive concept drops away. The Samoans, according to Miss Mead,[13] do
not possess any well defined concept of motive. Their social habits do
not allow them to inquire and their language does not permit them to
speak concerning the motives of any one in doing anything. The absence
of a motive-concept implies a distinctive attitude toward personality. A
Samoan love does not engage the personalities of its participants. Very
deeply, and even as between husband and wife, a deep personal attachment
is regarded as indecent. Needless to say, the natural family is quite
submerged in the Samoan kinship and village organization. Thus the
ethnologist, the psychologist, and the student of the family arrive at
the same truth from different points of view. The psychologist notes
that the behavior which most completely engages a personality in action
is motivated behavior. The ethnologist notes that the motive concept,
the personality value and the natural family unit are linked elements in
a culture; the student of the family discovers that motives are
important in domestic life because they testify to the engaging of a
complete personality therein -- because they are part of the
psychological equipment of the domestic man.

In normal experience motives are, as we say, "mixed." We are seldom able
to pin them down and identify them [p.109] with certainty. As Thomson
rightly complains, they are numerous, elusive, complex, varied, and
locking in constancy. And yet, without insisting unduly upon the
naturalistic accuracy of our conception, we describe motives as having
both quantity and quality. Having quantity (or intensity), they are
capable of being added to or subtracted from each other, having quality,
they are capable of being grouped or clustered in various ways. The
problem of classifying motives does not differ fundamentally from all
problems of classification. A thousand individuals be they beetles or
poems, verbs or motives, will continue to present individual differences
whether we group them or not. In order to group them we must assign
classificatory significance to certain of their features, disregarding
others.

The motive which is peculiar to loving-and-cherishing behavior is a
motive of benevolence toward the person who is loved. The domestic man
intends his acts to benefit his beloved rather than himself. It is
permissable, therefore, to classify as domestic those motives which
direct behavior toward the welfare of some definite other person, and to
regard all other motives as nondomestic. The domestic motive is the
distinctive characteristic which marks the active aspect of loving and
cherishing. Just as the economic man is perfectly selfish, so the
domestic man is perfectly unselfish.

The distinction between selfishness and unselfishness is a dubious one,
but we cannot explain the nature of the domestic man without expounding
it. One of the first signs of sophistication in a college student is his
grasp of a certain formula for calculating motives whereby he can prove
that all acts whatsoever are selfishly motivated. [p.110] The
philanthropist and the miser, the patriot and the city boss, the loving
daughter and the faithless wife are all alike selfish. Even the martyr
who seems to be sacrificing himself is, according to this formula,
giving himself the satisfaction of martyrdom. This current sophistry
impresses tender minds, but after all it amounts to nothing but a word
trick. If we define "selfishness" in such a way that it corresponds to
"preference," then we can argue that whatever is decided upon is
preferred, and whatever is preferred is preferred by a self, and hence
is selfishly preferred. When this little logism has been played through,
it is still necessary to distinguish between certain kinds of "selfish"
actions. If some actions are intended to minister to the needs or
increase the happiness of others, such actions can be classified
together, whether the word "unselfish" is used to describe them, or not.
Actions of this kind flow naturally from a disposition to love and to
cherish. Nature has equipped husband and wife to delight each other in
the act of sex, and has prepared the parent to minister to the needs of
the child. Thereby nature sets up prototypes for the activities of a
domestic man.

The activity which we have for the moment described as "unselfish" would
be regarded by many thinkers as a perverse and intricate kind of
selfishness. For the kind of conduct which results from a personal
attachment occupies a very uncertain place in the speculations of social
theorists. In economics unselfishness of any kind is an anomaly; in
sociology and political theory it is comprehended only as group-loyalty,
which submerges [p.111] these theories except as a special form of
self-seeking. If a governor appoints his son to some high office,
despite the fact that some other candidate was better qualified,
economic theory sees this act as an economic act wherein the governor
drew some of the invisible wages of his office by securing something he
desired for himself -- _i.e.,_ his son's appointment. In political
theory it might be pointed out that the governor had two capacities: the
capacity of a public official and the capacity of a father. In making
this appointment the governor permitted the father to act outside of his
proper sphere. A personal motive interfered with the discharge of a
public duty. It would not be asked whether the personal motive was
self-regarding or other-regarding. The personal motive would be regarded
necessarily as a selfish motive. And if, in order to protect his son,
the governor would ruin his own political prospects, or risk
imprisonment, these sacrifices would still be regarded from the point of
view of economics or political theory as risks selfishly assumed. If a
man gives up everything he has in order to save his wife or child, it is
regarded as selfish. In such a context the word "selfish" loses its
meaning.

If these acts are seen from the standpoint of the family, from the point
of view of those persons who benefit by them, they appear to be
unselfish. The governor is acting as a domestic man. A sacrifice of a
father for a son is an evidence of loving and cherishing. Favoritism and
nepotism look selfish from without the family, but unselfish from
within. The acts in themselves are neither selfish nor unselfish; the
antithesis between selfishness and unselfishness lies not in nature,
which is ethically blind, but in the set of principles and
presuppositions [p.112] which we use in classifying acts. This is
evident when we compare the plausibility of the sociological and the
economic explanations at human behavior. For almost all conduct can be
referred in sociological theory to an other-regarding movement of the
mind, in economic theory to a self-regarding movement. The two diverse
explanations of the same act can be made equally plausible and are in
fact equally true.

For example, let us say that a woman is buying a hat. On her way she
passes a curio shop, where many strange articles are displayed. She
gives only a passing glance at the richly gleaming articles in the
window, and passes on to the milliner's where she buys a hat. Explain
this by economic theory: she had a certain quantity of desire for the
hat which was greater than her desire for the strange ornaments. She
satisfied her selfish desire. Explain it by sociological theory: she was
sensitive to the fact that other people approved of the wearing of hats,
but not of the wearing of showy jewelry. A maiden from Basutoland would
for similar reasons have passed by the millinery shop and purchased a
fine nose ring in the curio shop. Now let us suppose that we explain her
conduct with reference to the family and to her capacity for loving and
cherishing. We can say that she wished to please her husband by making
herself more attractive, to give him greater cause for pride in her.
None of these explanations are complete; any of them may be transposed
into the language of the others; the value of any of them depends upon
the importance of the general conclusions we can reach by making use of
them.

The overt action which proceeds from a domestic motive is a distinctive
kind of behavior, which should have [p.113] a definite name. It may be
called benevolent activity, or perhaps (if the words are understood in a
special sense), a domestic act. It is perhaps the kind of thing we mean
when we use the words "to cherish". It is a fundamental element of that
interaction between members which the structure of the natural family
implies. It is a vehicle wherein the separate will of a member of the
family finds expression, and hence it is a manifestation of the basic
_will-tension_ of marriage. It is productive of the intrinsic _values_
of family life.

The distinction between domestic and nondomestic motivation is of course
merely conceptual. There is in nature no hard and fast classification of
motives. In practical life motives are mixed. The woman who is putting
her hair in curl papers is actuated partly by a domestic motive: to
please her husband or lover and partly by a nondomestic (or economic)
motive: to satisfy her personal vanity. How much of a component of
domestic motivation is necessary in order that an act may be regarded as
domestic?

Psychologists who remember the extravagances of sensationist psychology
with its classification of subjective data will be prejudiced against
the use of such a scheme as this which is here set forth. It is so easy
to draw up catalogues of emotions or sensations or desires or instincts;
so many of these catalogues are meaningless. An arbitrary list of types
of motive would have no value if we were trying to study psychology, but
it is necessary when we are studying the family. It brings before us the
distinctions which may or may not be real in the human organism, but
which are certainly real in the business of family life. [p.114] It is
certainly both futile and impossible to name a quantity of domestic
motivation which invests acts with domestic character. The domestic or
nondomestic character of an act is clearly manifested only in certain
situations of suspense, when rival interests are hanging in the balance.
In such situations it is a matter of no consequence how the components
of motivation be added or subtracted, so long as the domestic motive
prevails. The domestic component need be neither great nor small; it
need only be sufficient, that is to say, sufficient to turn the balance
in favor of an act which benefits the marriage partner rather than the
self or some other interest.

There is a simple pro-condition of benevolent activity which can he
described in the words "paramount loyalty," or "preponderant interest."
The domestic man always deems the welfare of his marriage partner to be
a matter of highest value to him. Any conflicting interest which comes
to his attention will be subordinated to this preponderating interest.
This does not mean that he must, like Annabel Lee,

  Live with no other thought
  Than to love and be loved by me.

His thoughts need not dwell perpetually upon the welfare of his mate.
There may be innumerable choices and decisions in which her welfare is
in nowise engaged. It is not necessary that domestic acts should always
be sacrificial acts. It is only necessary that when an interest in a
member of one's family is in direct conflict with other interests the
former must prevail.

If a man values his club or his business more highly than his family,
there is something wrong with his family [p.115] life. Circumstances may
compel him to be more persistently and assiduously occupied with outside
affairs, but our common-sense view of things demands that except in some
exceptional situation the interest of the members of the family should
predominate when it comes to a showdown. If the wife's health demands
they move to Arizona, the husband must sacrifice his business in New
York. This personal evaluation which seems so natural within the family
appears out of place or mischievous outside of the domestic circle. As
we have observed, it is known as favoritism or nepotism in the domain of
business or politics. But in family life it is normal and good. There
are a number of situations in which ethical theory requires that the
interest of a member of one's family be sacrificed to some other
interest, but there is no pretense that such situations are norms of
domestic conduct. Should one member of a family perjure himself for
another? It is understood that such situations are exceptional, just as
martyrdom is exceptional, and that they interfere with the functioning
of the family.

Paramount loyalty is thus seen to be the subjective prerequisite of
domestic activity, and a distinctive endowment of the domestic man. It
is a mental act or sentiment by which the welfare of some one else is
evaluated as having greater importance than the welfare of any other
person or the attainment of any conflicting aim which may be
simultaneously present to the mind. Value-begetting attachments of this
kind are, of course, at once conscious and emotional. If they were
unconscious, the psychoanalysts would call them complexes. Paramount
loyalty, being conscious, is called a sentiment or
"con[p.116]stellation," not a complex. It is the key to the
psychological make-up of the domestic man. Briefly, the domestic man is
a hypothetical person who, though normal in other respects, is abnormal
with respect to his personalistic mode of behavior. Instead of balancing
a variety of conflicting interests when he decides questions of
advantage or disadvantage, he refers all these questions to one final
standard -- the welfare of his domestic partner. Real men approach this
quality of mind to a greater or less degree. The domestic man is a
fiction, and being a fiction can be also an ideal.

There are some who think that a life lived for another person is
necessarily a satisfactory life, that even if such a life does not bring
apparent happiness, still it yields obscure satisfactions which are all
the more profound and intense because they are concealed. It is a
mistake to preach such an immediate connection between benevolent
activity and happiness. Unskillful cherishing may be more disastrous to
happiness than enlightened selfishness. There is no absolute superiority
in _homo domesticus_ over _homo oeconomicus_ or any other ideal man. It
is only relative to the life of the family that the domestic man offers
a more appropriate ideal of conduct than others.

In the family as elsewhere there is unlimited scope for artistry and
science. There is an art in the planning of a surprise and science in
the planning of a meal. A cultivated aesthetic sense can express itself
in anything from a coat of paint on the kitchen table to an artistically
managed quarrel which melts away in delicious tears of reconciliation.
Applications of scientific knowledge are possible all along the line:
the husband's bad temper can be cured if the wife knows about orange
juice and vitamin [p.117] C; the wife's coldness can be overcome if the
husband will watch the periodicity of the moon. The domestic man may be
ignorant of all the important things, and his life may be tragically
unhappy because of his ignorance. The domestic man as such may be
neither wise nor happy, and none the less be continuously domestic. The
distinction between domestic and nondomestic does not parallel the
distinction between wisdom and folly, welfare and misery, happiness and
discontent. Domesticity and its opposite are the poles of an independent
series of values.

For illustration, let us imagine a crisis in the life of a young family.
George and Dorothy have been living in a one-room apartment for two
years while George has tried to launch himself as a commercial artist,
and Dorothy has helped out by working at Macy's department store. George
is thinking that the time has come to give up his plans and get into
some business which will yield more money for Dorothy. Dorothy fights
grimly to keep on because she is afraid that he will not be happy in the
insurance business, and she insists that she is glad to go on working
and doing the cooking over a gas jet in the bathroom if George will only
keep on with his art. This is clearly a case of domestic behavior.

On another floor of the some cheap apartment house another young couple
is in equal misery, but in this case the wife is complaining that she is
sick of living in one room, while the husband laments that his chances
of success are being ruined by her demands. These two situations are
externally parallel, but from the domestic point of view there is a
world of difference between them. We do not know on the facts as given
which of the two situations is most painful, but we do know that they
unfold [p.118] themselves on different levels. One is domestic, the
other nondomestic. The difference between them is not a difference of
degree but a difference of kind.

This difference in kind between a domestic and a nondomestic situation
has long been taught to our young people. The older generation has
repeatedly assured the younger generation that marriage will give life
more depth, more fullness. The language in which this message is
preached borrows phrases from religion on the one hand and from the
literature of romance on the other. Especially the word _love_ serves at
once to describe and to explain the deeper life which marriage makes
possible. George and Dorothy love each other, whereas the other young
couple do not love each other! The explanation is so simple that it
leaves us where we were at the beginning, with our vague schoolgirl
faith in true love. It leaves us with the blank question still before
us, whether this or that kind of love is to be a possibility in our own
lives. Love explains nothing, but is itself a thing that needs to be
explained.

Nowhere in our thinking is the survival of faith in primitive word magic
more apparent than in our use of the word love. Let a woman be rude,
captious, complaining, jealous, and mean to a man, and if it is only
said that she acts that way out of love for him, the word is held to
change the color of her actions. Just as some states require that an
internal revenue stamp must be affixed to a certain class of documents,
so some customs require that a declaration of love must in decency
accompany a certain class of proposals. The potency is in the word
rather than in any one specific thing to which the word refers, for the
word covers a multitude of different [p.119] attitudes. It can be traced
through a maze of contradictory meanings. For instance: the home
requires love; love is essentially free; free love breaks up the home.
It can be applied indiscriminately to contrary kinds of behavior, as any
movie plot will demonstrate. If the man seduces the virgin, it is
because he loves her, and if he refrains from seducing her it may also
be because of his love for her.

In another of the stock situations of drama the woman loves the man but
believes that her love will harm him. Then if she renounces him, this is
due to her great love, but if she still clings to him this is also due
to her love. Love blows either hot or cold; whatever she does she does
for love. It is another case of word magic.

But when we speak of a domestic motive, of preponderant interest, or of
paramount loyalty, we bring before our minds something which has a more
precise and unequivocal meaning. If this woman's attitude is domestic,
that is to say, if her interest in the man's welfare looms larger in her
life than anything else, then she renounces him. This very attitude is
indeed one of the many things which are by some people called love. It
happens to be the one which is of greatest importance in family life In
insisting on its importance we do not disparage any of the other
varieties or manifestations of lover. Least of all do we contend that
love is any less significant than it is generally held to be. We mean
simply that love as a word refers to many different things which have
different kinds and degrees of importance in marriage.

What are these different meanings which the word love has accumulated
and the different points of view from which it is regarded? There is
first the notion that by [p.120] love we mean bare sex life. A book on
"love in nature" tells us about the mating habits of frogs and lizards.
Sharing this point of view but lending to it an artistic interest are
those who, like Ovid or Havelock Ellis, see love as an art based on sex,
an art which finds in sex life its principal medium of expression.
Others like Edgar Saltus in his _Historia Amoris_ think of love as a
texture of social conventions about sex life. They compare love in Greek
times when there were heterae and temples of Aphrodite with love in
medieval Europe when there were tourneys and courts of love, and with
love in our own day when there are movies and coeducational
universities. Freud dips into his deep sea of the unconscious and drags
forth Narcissine love, which attaches to a projection of the self, and
object love, which attaches to a complement to the self.

There are some metaphysicians who see in love a universal principle of
nature. Empedocles said it was the principle of attraction; Schopenhauer
declared it was the life force. Far more numerous are those who describe
or classify love experiences, whether their own or other people's.
Frances Newman's "hard boiled virgin" felt love as a fountain playing
within her somewhere in the region of the navel. Others have seemed to
feel it as something resembling fire rather than water. Some writers try
to classify all the different feelings which can be called love.
Stendhal found that love is of four kinds: passion-love, body-love,
spirit-love, vanity-love. The new school of German philosophy, the
so-called "phenomenologists," attempts to define the subjective state
with rigorous methodical accuracy. Max Scheler, a leader of this school,
has worked out the following definition: "Love [p.121] is a movement
from lower value to higher value in the object loved." Some of these
attitudes called love bear very little relation to the functioning of
the family. Don Juan was a lover, but not a domestic man.

From the practical standpoint of courtship and marriage, the most
confusing ambiguity in the meaning of the word love results from its
dual application to experience of feeling on the one hand, and of
purposing and evaluating on the other. Many of those who describe a love
experience present it to us as something that seizes upon us while we
remain more or less passively subject to it. It may come or it may go,
as the foul weather follows fair. While it lasts it bathes us in a glow
of pleasure which we enjoy but do not create. It beckons us with more or
less directness toward the possession of the beloved as the supreme goal
of desire. In the language of psychology this is a "feeling response"
rather than a personalistic mode of behavior. It is something that
happens to one, not something that one does. It is an ultimate datum of
experience in which reason and purpose are not present as components,
and which is no more under the control of the will than is the beating
of one's heart. Such a love as this is the natural basis at a liaison,
but not of marriage.

The love which marriage requires is more highly developed on the active
and voluntary side. It seeks not only to enjoy the beloved, but also to
serve and benefit her. This is the kind of love for which young people
who are thinking of marriage must search their hearts. In order to avoid
confusion we have given it a special name, calling it the domestic
attitude, or the sentiment of paramount loyalty. It you prefer to call
it love, well and [p.122] good. It is intimately related to the feeling
reaction of love, for this feeling enters into it as a component, along
with reason and purpose. It is the kind of love of which one can be
master rather than slave. It is the kind of love which is the necessary
precondition of the functioning of the family, and which constitutes the
psychological equipment of the domestic man.

It is notorious that those who marry are prone to indulge themselves in
transitory idealizations and to accept temporarily the most fantastic
fictions, so that many a bride who pledges her truth to a more human
being imagines that she is pledging it to none other than the domestic
man himself. The imagination of lovers long ago invented this man; it is
time that a place be made for him in social theory and that the domestic
view of human nature be recognized in the social studies.

[p.123]

A DOMESTIC act, by definition, involves two persons, because it
performed by one person on behalf of another. We have hitherto
considered only its source or origin; we are now to consider its effect
as well. With reference to any particular domestic net, we can designate
the two family members involved by calling them respectively the active
member and the beneficiary member. The active member is the person
performing the domestic act: the beneficiary member is the person for
whose benefit the act is done.

It lies before us now to inquire whether there is any mode of domestic
behavior which is proper to the beneficiary member. The active member,
we have seen, is known by his domestic motive, his preponderant interest
in the welfare of another person. What response on the part of the
beneficiary member constitutes domestic behavior?

Certainly the family permits and encourages a reciprocity of domestic
activity, so that a beneficiary member with reference to one act may be
the active member with reference to another. The wife prepares a dessert
which she knows will delight her husband; the husband buys something
which he is sure will please his wife. It would be possible perhaps to
regard the husband's activity as being in some way a complement to the
wife's. But such [p.124] an interpretation of the facts would stultify
our conception of the principles of marriage. For benevolent activity
would then become a mere matter of exchange. The principle of _do ut
des_, I give that you may give, is an economic principle, not a
principle of domestic relations. An act done in consequence of some
benefit to be received, and with intent to repay an equivalent benefit,
loses its domestic character and becomes economic. In so far as the
attempt is made consciously to maintain a balance of benevolent
activity, so that the quantity rendered by one member shall be equal to
the quantity he receives, that activity is no longer domestic. It is
therefore excluded that we should consider that the beneficiary member
responds to domestic activity in his favor by himself entering upon
domestic activity. The interplay of benevolence in a family is not a
mere exchange of favors on a market basis; it is spontaneous.

Domestic behavior in the beneficiary member is passive. It is not an act
but an attitude -- the attitude of appreciation. Appreciation is the
complement of domestic activity. It is the passive mode of domestic
behavior. If A does something for B, and B appreciates what A has done,
the domestic act is completed.

Far from compromising the domestic quality of an act, or reducing it to
a mere exchange of services, appreciation rather intensifies its
domestic quality by bringing more clearly to the attention that
component in the motive which was domestic. If the wife assumes that it
is solely for her sake that the husband has bought two tickets to the
theater, the husband is likely to forget that he bought them partly to
please himself. There is a magic in appreciation by which, as the
deriva[p.125]tion of the word suggests, it enormously magnifies little
things.

In the interplay of domestic activity and appreciation -- a total
behavior to which we give the name "domestic interaction" -- there is
comprehended both the active and the passive side of love. The attitude
of appreciation, in its most intense form, can amount to a worship of
the beloved. In a more commonplace form it is a simple recognition of
benefits which a loved one confers upon one.

In the ever significant act of sex, where domestic attitudes come most
sharply to focus, there can develop a fine balancing of the active and
passive sides of love. This act is not fully developed aesthetically, it
has not reached its full beauty, unless each participant has at once the
sense of giving pleasure to the other, and of recognizing spontaneity in
the free gift he receives. These two attitudes are distinct. Sometimes
they are separated. Dr. Hamilton found in his inquiry into the sex lives
of a hundred married women that for thirty-two of them the sex act was
often less than mutual; for eight of them it was always sheer
submission. The frigid woman who derives no direct pleasure from her
husband's embraces performs a domestic act when she submits to them; her
husband for his part may appreciate her sacrifice, but he cannot regard
his own action as domestic, nor is there any ground for appreciation by
the wife. The act of sex is appropriately the central fact in the
psychological situation of marriage, for in this act a complete system
of domestic behavior, both active and passive, can be manifested.

The ratio of domestic activity to appreciation is a sig[p.126]nificant
index of the quality of a domestic life. This ratio can be observed in
the individual members, where it may be a consequence of the set of
one's character or an indication of the way family life is organized.
And it can be studied in the relationship of the family members among
themselves, where it serves to distinguish the fundamental types of
family from each other.

When we first contemplate the fact that an individual's domestic
behavior may consist of an active or a passive component, we realize
that we will have to explore the consequences of individual differences
among men. Some people will seem predisposed to a passive attitude, and
others will tend to meet each situation with action.

It would contribute greatly to the convenience of students of mankind if
individual human beings showed no variations among themselves, and if
all of them behaved exactly alike when placed in like situations. We
feel the initial inadequacy of any general rule of human behavior,
because none of the people with whom we become acquainted turn out to be
average men. We set up this standard of domestic behavior, and we
imagine the uniform benevolence of a domestic man, but we know that real
people differ from this ideal type, and that they differ in varying
degrees and in diverse ways.

The idiosyncrasies which we sum up in the word "character" resist
systematic classification. We say in an offhand way that this person is
stupid and that one bright, that this one is good and that one bad, that
one is passionate and another frigid and so forth. A more comprehensive
scheme is suggested by the ancient tradition of our culture which
distinguishes men as choleric, sanguine, bilious, or phlegmatic. There
have been a [p.127] number of attempts to found a science of character
in recent years. Kretschmer's "six fundamental temperaments" and
Spranger's "ideally basic types of individuality" are examples. One
scheme for classifying psychological types which may turn out to be of
real service in studying domestic behavior is Jung's distinction between
the introvert and extravert. The introvert makes internal adjustments to
his situation: the extravert always tries to "do something about it."
The introvert is acutely conscious of his own feelings; the extravert is
less given to introspection and more inclined to purposive action. The
domestic behavior of an extravert will perhaps tend to take the form of
domestic activity, of cherishing. The introvert may manifest his
domestic behavior more frequently in the form of appreciation. The pale
lovers who sicken and sigh in despair are introverts: the red-blooded
lovers who try to abduct their women are extraverts. Intraversion and
extraversion are of course relative terms. There is nothing absolute
about the classification. The introvert is still capable of purposive
action, the extravert can entertain the feeling and make the gesture of
appreciation.

We took note of the fact that within the meaning of the word love are
included experiences of feeling on the one hand and of evaluating and
purposing on the other. These two kinds of love experience, when looked
upon from the standpoint of the natural family, are, respectively,
appreciation and domestic activity. The introvert type tends to stress
the one, the extravert the other. Both are necessary to the complete
functioning of the family.

[p.128]

WHEN lovers are thinking of marriage they are wont to protest or pledge
to each other that their love, such as it is, will resist the ravages of
time. A love which is only a golden moment does not meet their demands.
Marriage requires of love a certain temporal extension; it involves a
projection of love through time. The lover and his mistress may be
content to accept love as a cross section of experience, but the husband
and wife must try to imagine it as a profile extending through a course
of years.

Love itself has an aspect of novelty and an aspect of recurrence. It
includes an element of discovery and surprise (which corresponds on the
physical level to the orgasm), and an element of sequence and
development (which corresponds to parenthood). Both of these aspects of
love should show themselves in a complete marriage relationship. But our
traditions when they place such an emphasis on the need for a positive
identification of the state of love before marriage necessarily envisage
love under its aspect of discovery. And yet the need for permanence
cannot be ignored. Therefore in the same breath with which a lover
announces that his feelings are new to his experience, he will assert
that they are not subject to change. He eagerly pledges paradoxes: that
the flux of life is to be arrested, the course of time is to [p.129] be
checked, that the future is to conform to this supreme present, and that
love in its transitory aspect is to remain unchanged The form of his
protest reveals his deep-seated belief that time and love are not
natural allies but potential enemies. His conception of love is such
that he can only stand in helpless horror before the prospect that the
day must come

  When prettiness turns to pomp, and strength to fat,
  And Love, Love, Love, to Habit.

If time operates to destroy or degrade love, its principal agency is
habit. Life processes demand recurrent acts, and recurrent acts tend to
become habitual. There is no escape from recurrence or habit-formation.
The parting kiss bestowed each morning loses its ardor and becomes a
gesture; the little favor done daily becomes a matter of course. Even
acts of sex, however nature may conspire to lift them from the current
of this deadly stream, are none the less borne down toward the level of
habit. Habit is at once destructive and creative. It quenches the
sparkle of novelty in things, but it also frees us from preoccupation
with them.

Elinor Glyn and her disciples are always warning women against the
danger of habits in marriage. According to their notion, one must
perpetually surprise and mystify one's husband, lest he seek elsewhere
for novelty. Uncertainty is to be sustained with the utmost ingenuity.
The encroachment of habit is to be resisted _à outrance_. The wife who
finds herself "taken for granted" is already a failure.

This notion is a corollary of the tomcat view of marriage. The policy it
proposes is suitable enough for [p.130] people who are playing with a
transitory liaison, but it is both futile and inadequate in marriage. To
resist habit-formation by coquetry is to try to sweep back the tide with
a broom. The true principles of marriage require that habits be used,
not that they be fought.

In order to make use of habit formation in marriage, it is necessary to
distinguish between that which habit destroys and that which habit
confirms. All the manifold acts which make up the routine of living
together are persistently subjected to a process of degradation; they
tend more and more to become automatic and to lose their zest. The bride
and groom enjoy their first adventure in washing dishes together, but
their older friends smile indulgently at their innocent pleasure,
knowing how relentless will be the pressure toward degrading dishwashing
to a chore. The chore may be cheerfully performed; it may become a
treasured part of the domestic ritual, but it cannot continue through
the years to have the same significance. That which begins as an
adventure entered upon in exuberant spirit becomes a duty performed
correctly and according to custom. It is in this way that habit attacks
marriage routine. But habit does not attack benevolent activity, for
benevolent activity is not a routine. It is not identified with any
concrete and overt action, but with a motive, a dominant interest, which
can he expressed in any action. The man who helps to wash dishes in the
first months of marriage is acting domestically because his motive is to
benefit his bride. If the washing of dishes later becomes a habit and a
duty, and is no longer a matter of choice and decision, then this
particular action is no longer benevolent. But new situations always
arise and demand that choices be [p.131] made anew and interests be
balanced against each other. No life can consist completely of recurrent
acts. Without conscious choosing there is no conscious life. Wherever
there are choices to be made the domestic motive can operate and
domestic activity can take place. Time can confirm and intensify the
habit of making these choices in the interest of one's marriage partner.
But nothing can preserve the glamour of novelty in things that have
ceased to be new.

It behooves those who promise or expect enduring love in marriage to
have an appropriate conception of love. If they demand permanence in
that which cannot last, they are only courting disappointment. Let them
then recognize in advance that this state of mind which they identify in
themselves when they fall in love is certain to change; let them avoid
the risk of envisioning their love as a thing concretely expressed in
certain symbolic acts -- a kiss for instance, or a warming of slippers
by the fire -- for the significance of these routine acts will change as
the years pass. And above all, let them realize that the only love which
has meaning in marriage is the active process which goes on through a
period of time, not the static condition of the mind which is
preliminary to a betrothal or a wedding.[14]

[p.132] If love in marriage is identified with domestic activity, there
is no further difficulty in acknowledging the possibility of permanent
love. Love and time are allies. Domestic activity and habit supplement
each other. The relation of domestic activity to habit is that of
creator to preserver. Benevolent activity can begin what habit will
thereafter perpetuate. A domestic motive initiates an act which is
designed to benefit the marriage partner -- the husband helps with the
dishes or the wife gives her mate first chance at the newspaper. These
acts, originally domestic, will later become habitual. They no longer
utilize domestic motivation; they are among the things taken for
granted. They become a part of the structure and organization of the
family, as the hardened skeleton of the coral polyp becomes part of the
structure of the coral tree. The growth and development of the family
consists in the accumulation of just such habits and the fixation of
just such routines. The life history of the family is the account of
this process. It is in this wise that a family grows from youth to old
age. It is in this sense that a family can be a product of the creative
art of its members.

The process of habit formation is of course indifferent and unselective.
Nondomestic acts can become habitual as easily as domestic acts. Bad
habits are as easy to develop as good ones. In many families there is a
rock-ribbed routine which responds solely to the selfish demands of one
member, and is not in any sense a product of benevolent activity. Father
gets two eggs, sits in the best chair, and receives valet-service from
mother, whom he intimidates into obedience by using gruff words or
displaying a severe frown.

[p.133] Even the habits which develop from domestic acts are not always
pleasant. The miscarriage of good intentions is a familiar tragedy, and
quite often a misconceived benevolence will become part of the habit
system of a family. The wife's campaign against some masculine foible or
her attempt to improve her husband's taste in reading may become a
persistent nuisance in the home. But as time goes on correction can be
made of those errors which arise from a failure to understand one's
mate. Montaigne wrote that they only can be friends who by being long
together have learned to know each other perfectly. It is the virtue of
young love that it experiments and of old love that it knows. The
deepening of sympathetic understanding of each other, like the
accumulation of habits toward each other, is a product not of love
alone, but of time and love.

[p.134]

ONE who is about to invest his life in marriage has no disposition to
look for the consequences which ensue to the race or the world from
marriage in general, whereof his own is an inconspicuous instance. That
his own marriage, together with billions of others, may perpetuate the
race and transmit the social heritage is a fact of meager importance to
him. The Occidental does not marry in order to fulfill a public duty. In
China, according to Keyserling, these general considerations motivate
marriages, but this fact must be interpreted in connection with the
submerging of the natural family in the Chinese household. Certainly in
the Western World any man who should propose marriage to a girl out of
regard for the interests of society or race could hardly expect to have
his argument taken seriously. Our own day is especially hostile to the
idea of making marriage a matter of duty and obligation; here if
anywhere the thing must be done for its own sake.

Marriage is by no means unique in this disparity between the social or
racial functions it fulfills and the actual motives and purposes of the
individuals who engage in it. The same thing is true of business. A
stockbroker does not open his offices in order to aid in the important
function of distributing economic goods, nor does a street car conductor
take his job in order to assist [p.135] in furnishing transportation to
the community. However, there is this significant difference between the
attitudes of a man in business and of a man and woman in marriage: that
the men in business know exactly what they want, while those who marry
are much less clear as to their purposes. The stockbroker wants "to make
money," the conductor hopes "to make a living." They have been taught
from childhood the meaning of business and the purpose of having a job.
The bride and groom have received no such instruction; their purposes
are more beautiful, more fanciful and more variable than the purposes of
broker and conductor, but they are also less clear.

Can we not clarify these purposes, separate the possible from the
fantastic, and discover that aim in marriage and that object in family
life which have real and direct meaning to young people who are planning
their firm? What must marriage give them if they are to regard it as a
success?

It is fruitless to discuss the function or purpose of the family without
establishing beforehand the point of view from which the discussion is
to proceed. From the point of vieW of the human species as a whole, or
of civilization in general, it might appear that the family fulfills
this or that function. But from the point of view of the family these
same alleged "functions" might appear vain and meaningless.

We might imagine ourselves on the top of a high mountain, far removed
from the turmoil of actual life, looking down upon countless little
homesteads in the valleys below, and asking, "What end do these serve?"
Around us would stretch the panorama of nature, its trees and its
[p.136] grasses and flowers, and of these we might also ask, "What end
do they serve?" And we would recognize the artificiality of our
question, for nature has no purposes. Still we might fix arbitrarily
upon some fragment of the totality of nature, and ask how all the other
things contribute to the persistence of the selected fragment. There are
some cows grazing in a little glen, and with reference to these cows we
can easily discover the function of the grass, the trees and the
homesteads. The grass nourishes the cows, the trees offer them shade,
the homesteads supply them with shelter. Or again we can direct our
minds to the whole human species, and inquire how all of these things
which lie before us contribute to the persistence of the human race. The
grass and the cows and the trees all have their importance in this
connection, and so also have the homesteads, and the families which
inhabit the homesteads. The family, it may be, contributes to the
welfare of the race and society, but this does not mean that the welfare
of the race and society are intrinsically the ends of the family. It is
only the accidental turn of a query, and not the inevitable nature of
the family itself, which can fix upon racial or social welfare as "ends"
of domestic life.

We have defined the family, not as a social institution, but as
something anterior to and independent of society. We are studying it,
not as an element of social organization, but as a thing in nature.
Hence we cannot judge it as if it existed for the sake of society; we
must think of it as existing for itself. We have noted, furthermore,
that family life has values which cannot be shared outside its circle.
The family stands in isolation, as an autonomous system. Should we from
the mountain top assign trans[p.137]cendent ends and purposes to the
families, we should be denying the isolation and autonomy of the family.
If there is an end toward which domestic life strives, this end must be
something immanent within the family, not transcendent and reaching
beyond it.

We leave the mountain top; we cease to inquire about the race or
society; we come down into one of the cottages of the valley, and see a
family sitting around the evening lamp. Here is an object in nature to
be studied, as one might study a specimen of algae, a mollusk, a colony
of streptococci, or a eucalyptus tree. How can we attribute an end or
aim to this entity which is set before our neutral gaze? How can we know
whether this family is "successful" or not? We would not ordinarily
think of ascribing ends and aims to mollusks and streptococci. These
things are what they are, and the only aim we can possibly attribute to
them is the aim of continuing stubbornly to be what they are. The
separate organs or parts of these things have indeed their functions;
the valves, muscles, chlorophyl, cells, sap, neuclei, all have their
ends in the maintenance of the organism. Our concept of "organism"
permits us to ascribe functions to the _parts_, but to the organism as a
_whole_, studied in isolation, we can assign no functions whatsoever.
Analogously, when we study the family _per se_ the only functioning that
we can discover is an interrelated activity of the members, not a
service which the total family renders to something else. The
functioning of the family is not a matter of what the family does or
fails to do for the world, but a matter of what the family members do or
fail to do for each other. The only end or purpose which we can properly
attribute to the family is one which relates on the [p.138] one hand to
the actions, on the other to the intentions of the members thereof.

Out of what combination of intention and achievement, of will and of
act, is there compounded this thing which we seek as "success" in
marriage?

 

From the point of view of the individual family member why should one
marry at all? What contribution will marriage make to one's life? What
purpose is intrinsic to a marriage project?

To have children? But why have children? From the standpoint of the
race, of course, they are necessary, and it is the "function" of the
family to produce them. But from the standpoint of those who marry they
are simply prospective members of the very organism which is under
discussion. Why bring this organism into existence? To say that one
marries in order to have children is psychologically less accurate and
logically no more satisfactory than to say that one marries in order to
have a husband or a wife.

There is indeed that important difference between the status of husband
and wife and the status of children: the former are necessary to the
existence of a family, the latter only contingent. That which is
implicit in the sex side of marriage is not the certainty, but the
possibility only, of having children.

The development of a technique of contraception in the Western World has
tended to bring about a separation of the idea of marriage from the idea
of child-breeding. It is safe to say that if only those couples were
allowed to obtain marriage licenses whose primary object in marrying was
to beget children, the revenues of county [p.139] clerks and clergymen
would be seriously curtailed. But the old fact of contingency remains:
the device used to induce fertility, be it a witch-doctor's charm or a
gynecologist's diet prescription, is just as subject to uncertainty as
the device used to prevent conception. And whether children are born of
the union or not, the family continues.

It will be necessary to go more deeply than is here possible into the
problem of values which confronts those who try to decide whether they
want their marriage to be childless or fertile. In the meantime one
cannot beg the question by assuming out of hand that the only object of
marriage is to beget offspring. It may be that the logic of the marriage
situation is such that childless marriages are inevitably failures, and
that the procreation of children is a precondition of successful family
life. But even a fertile marriage may be a failure. A search must be
made for some principles of purpose or function which will encompass the
barren marriage along with the fertile, and which will apply no less to
the aged families that have had children than to the young families
which are about to have them.

It cannot he disputed that the total sex situation, which includes the
possibility of children, has given the family its fundamental tone and
character. But it may he that the family may have risen above its
source, and that out of a child-breeding function it may have created a
system of values which can exist without children. If this transmutation
has taken place it is only another instance of that general law which
Vaihinger once wished to formulate as "the law of the preponderance of
the means over the end." The qualities of family life which originate as
a [p.140] means for caring for offspring may have become ends in
themselves.

Were it not for the development of a technique of contraception on the
one hand, and the so-called "emancipation of woman" on the other, we
might never have had to face the problem of discovering some broader and
more universal principle of success in family life than the biological
principle. Were it not for the appearance in civilized life of vast
nonbiological value-systems, aesthetic and ethical, we might not be in a
position to appreciate or understand any other function of family life
than the biological one. But the facts as they stand in the Western
World to-day indicate that the child-breeding function does not suffice
to explain the family in terms of the purposes of its members, nor is
the fecundity of a marriage an adequate test of its success.

In every civilization much of the actual intention of those who marry
reflects the prevailing social code. They marry in order to secure that
which they are taught to expect in marriage. This influence of social
pressure upon the purposes of family members is evident in the attitude
toward child-breeding. Married people tend to reflect in their own minds
the community's appraisal of the importance of having children. In some
communities large families are much esteemed and childless marriages
looked upon with contempt. In other communities the parents of a large
family are pitied, and the childless couple viewed without condemnation.
Needless to say, a married pair will be more likely to leave children
out of their calculations if the sentiment of the community approves of
childless marriages.

In this respect as in others, the sentiment of the com[p.141]munity is
often a product of some real social need. Among warlike or colonizing
peoples fecundity will usually be highly valued; among peoples who are
living near the limit of their food supply, or among those who have
developed wide luxury tastes, social approval may be withdrawn from the
extremely fecund marriage. This is the situation in some Polynesian
communities and in American cities. The modern rationalization of this
attitude is a comprehensive doctrine of population growth which teaches
that the result of breeding up to the biological potentialities of the
race would be unmitigated disaster.

It is not only with respect to child-breeding that the community tries
to define the purposes of family members and to measure the success of
families. Many elements of family life are subject to community
judgment. Where polygamy is the rule, it may be that the man who has the
greatest number of most valuable wives and concubines is accounted to
have the most satisfactory family, just as the pair who have the largest
brood of children may be looked upon as most successful in the community
which approves of fecundity

The principle of conformity to conventional standards, however, is not a
satisfactory principle of success in marriage. It is a principle which
relates to the family institution, but not to the natural family. The
scope and limitations, as well as the mechanism, of the community's
influence upon the family members, have been analyzed in the chapter on
Conventions and the Family. It is clear that the must important
increments of family life go on beyond the reach of the community.

[p.142] Most of the judgments we actually pass upon some one else's
family are a resultant of our own socially-given standards rather than
an attempt to measure an absolute excellence in family life. If we
discover that a traveling salesman living at Newark, New Jersey, has an
extra wife in Omaha, we jump to the conclusion that his marriages are
both failures, whereas it may be, for all one knows, that save for the
intervention of the law both marriages are successful. Or again, if a
wealthy banker maintains in the same city a wife and several mistresses,
we declare without further inquiry that his family life is ruined. But
if we lived in another society, we should draw opposite conclusions from
the same facts. The Chinese hold that it is correct to yield to the
mother-in-law the dominant position in the household; Americans regard
such an abdication as lamentable or laughable. Wherever in our judgments
on the success or failure of a marriage we find ourselves merely judging
conformity to our own institutional rules, our attitude is blind, and
leaves us helpless.

For it happens that at the present time our institutional rules [or
family life are uncertain; our system of social conventions relative to
marriage is changing under the pressure of criticism; the young people
may be willing enough to conform and to accept conformity as a test of
success, but how are they to choose among the contradictory marriage
institutions which demand their conformity?

The ideal of monogamy and of contract marriage rather than purchase
marriage they find well enough established in their milieu, but aside
from this the conventions are in conflict. What of trial marriage,
companionate marriage, [p.143] birth control, woman's place? To mention
any one of the leading problems of magazine is to call to mind another
instance where social guidance fails us, and where we must choose
between conflicting rules, certain, however we may decide, that some
people will approve and others condemn.

Conformity to convention is not a test of domestic values. The
conventions which demand conformity are themselves among the things
requiring to be tested. The confusion in social guidance which the
Western World offers to those who marry is evidenced both directly and
indirectly. Directly there is a cross fire of propaganda emanating from
different schools and expounding divergent ideals of domestic life. The
slogans of free love, eugenics, feminism, and conservatism are
irreconcilable. The ideal of eugenics, which stresses the biological
significances of marriage, contradicts the ideal of free love, although
Ellen Key tried to conceal this contradiction by pretending that
children born of parents who loved each other inherited a superior
endowment in consequence of the subjective state of the parents at the
time of conception. Ellen Key's hypothesis, of course, has no standing
in the science of genetics. The appeal which feminism makes for a sex
solidarity among women is basically more opposed to the free love ideal
than to the conservative ideal of woman's domestic sphere. The confusion
of ideals is not only a conflict between conservatism and novelty, but
also a conflict between contradictory proposals of innovation.

The indirect source of confusion in social standards of domestic life
lies in the social, economic, and intellectual [p.144] that the services
once rendered to an individual by his family are now rendered to him by
other agencies. Professor Ogburn lists seven services which the family
rendered to our ancestors, namely:

  1.  Economic
  2.  Religious
  3.  Protective
  4.  Educational
  5.  Recreational
  6.  Status-defining
  7.  Affectional

According to Professor Ogburn, it lies at the root of modern family
disorganization that six out of these seven functions of the family are
lapsing in modern life. People are coming to look elsewhere than to the
family for these services, and groups other than the family are assuming
these functions. A man's wife was his business partner in the day of the
spinning wheel and in the environment of the milking shed, but not in
the day of the can-opener and in the environment of the elevator and
dumb-waiter. The religious meaning of the family was greatest when there
were household gods to be worshiped; it was still great when the Bible
was read by the head of the house while the children sat around the
table, in silence; but in these present days religion is usually paid
off, so far as the family is concerned, when the minister receives the
envelope from the best man, or when the children are sent to Sunday
School. The protective service given by husband to wife has been reduced
to the formal gesture of escorting her home from the theater alter dark,
while for all real protection against danger or violence one turns to
[p.145] the telephone and the police. The training of children is
committed more and more to a corps of teachers, and takes place more and
more in institutions outside the home, from nursery school to college.
The movies, the amusement parks, and the public playgrounds replace the
home as a play center. Except for a few thousand families who preserve
the traditions of a past age, social status is far more a matter of
individual achievement than of family connection. There remains that
service or function which Ogburn has called "affectional." Here and here
only the domain of the family has not been invaded. No other social
organ shows any tendency to usurp this function from the family; on the
contrary, business and education are becoming constantly less personal
and giving constantly less scope for the play of affection.

But the social conventions relating to marriage in the Western World
have not yet adapted themselves to the new situation. People are
therefore required to choose among competing standards, and cannot
merely accept a prevailing standard. Were it not for this practical
problem of choice, we might not have felt the need of searching for an
absolute standard of excellence in family life, nor need we have
occupied ourselves with the problem of defining the functions of the
natural family.

Upon what universally valid principle can we act in choosing that system
of conventions to which we will purpose to conform, and by which we will
judge the success of a family? If, confronted by this question, we turn
upon ourselves for counsel, a native urge impels us to grasp at one of
the things that seems to us ultimate -- happiness. Let us by all means
be happy; let us conform to the rules of that marriage institution which
will make [p.146] us glad, and turn aside from those conventions which
sadden us. With happiness as a working standard we may go a little way,
but we cannot go far, for happiness is not the kind of thing one can
measure in a test tube. There is the happiness of the bacchante and the
happiness of the contented cow. How can these be measured in and weighed
against each other?

The test of happiness is difficult to apply. If marriages are happiest
in which girls are "married young, treated rough, and told nothing," let
us accept this as one of our marriage conventions, and let us then
condemn the failure of those who marry mature women, treat them gently,
and impart information to them. If the monogamous marriage is conducive
to more gayety of spirit than the group marriage, let us convert the
Polynesians to the Christian point of view and induce them to give up
their heathenish practices. If, on the other hand, it appears that the
group-marrying Polynesians get more joy out of the thing than the
missionaries, let the missionaries be converted. If we observe that
young people who practice birth control are gay, while those
unacquainted with the technique are morose and serious, we conclude that
the practice of birth control is a commendable addition to the line of
conduct which society shall demand of married people. If virginity
before marriage results in unhappy sex life, we will adopt the more
hilarious practices of the numerous primitive peoples who do not permit
virgins to marry, and we will condemn chastity before marriage as
unsocial and unconventional conduct.

We may, if we wish, apply this test of happiness to all the marriage
systems of the world and compare the joy of being a Borneo bride with
the pleasure of being an [p.147] Eskimo husband. But our results will be
inconclusive in two ways. First of all, the test of happiness is
particularly hostile to the tradition of Christian marriage, for the
Christian marriage has always been a compromise with sin, and has looked
with contempt upon the mere joy of sex.

And then again, an institution cannot confer happiness. Happiness is a
thing achieved by people individually. Let these young people accept
whichever of the conflicting standards of conduct they see fit to
choose -- the problem of happiness remains unsolved for them. They still
stand before life without any solid guarantee that happiness will be
their reward for living according to the rules they have chosen.

 

If we no longer raise the question of conformity to socially-given
rules, and the parallel question of selecting among contradictory rules,
we are still tempted to judge the success of a married life by the
happiness it grants. We wish to estimate the amount of pleasure enjoyed
by the members of a family, and conclude that if this amount is large,
the family is a success; if it is small, the family is a failure. We
will discard all other classifications. We will not ask whether there
were children, but only whether husband and wife are happy together. We
will not inquire whether it is polygamous or monogamous, old-fashioned
or companionate, but only whether the husband and wife enjoy themselves.

In connection with the scientific research conducted by Dr. G. V.
Hamilton, a working definition of the happy marriage was drawn up by
rating those persons as happily wedded who expressed satisfaction with
their married [p.148] state. This definition proved to be useful in
classifying and evaluating the experiences of the two hundred married
persons whose testimony was taken as a basis of the research. From the
retrospective standpoint this, after all, is the only test of a happy
marriage. As a general ideal the concept is definite enough to be
opposed to Keyserling's theory that marriage is essentially a tragic
situation. But the definition is quite unserviceable in orienting the
purposes of those who are planning to marry. Certainly the bride and
groom intend so to conduct themselves that they will later be satisfied
with what they have done. But what are the desires which marriage can
satisfy? How are we to restrain those who demand too much of marriage,
and thereby foredoom themselves to disappointment? How are we to educate
those who fail to appreciate at their just worth the things that
marriage offers, and thereby remain dissatisfied with their married life
because they are blind to what it does for them? To propose as a
solution to those problems the judgment that the thing men seek in
marriage is happiness and that by happiness is meant the feeling of
being satisfied with the married state, is to mock the whole quest for
guidance by arguing in a circle.

The purely hedonistic standard of domestic achievement is valid enough
as a part of a general hedonistic philosophy of life. If we judge
everything under the sun by estimating its contribution to our pleasure
or our pain, we are justified in weighing marriage in the same scale.
The arguments for and against this general hedonistic doctrine have been
the commonplaces of ethical theory since the time of the Stoics and
Epicureans. It is unnecessary to discuss them here, for they have no
[p.149] precise bearing upon marriage as distinguished from other things
in life. If we declare that the successful family is the happy family in
the same sense that the successful plumber, doctor, lawyer, or admiral
is the one who is happy, we have learned nothing of the special
character of domestic achievement.

Sometimes this hedonistic view of marriage is offered, not as a part of
a general philosophy of pleasure, but as a special analysis of marriage
alone. It is made to appear that the production of happiness is the
special duty of the family. If any one is seen to be happy, let his
family life receive the credit for his good fortune, and if he is
observed to be sad, let his family take the blame. This is, of course,
an exorbitant demand to make upon marriage. If one of these dour men who
rarely smile and never laugh is married, do we require that his
character must change before he can be credited with success in his
domestic existence? And must we regard all these merrily irresponsible
people as proficient in marriage simply because of their unfailing good
humor? These constant factors of character operate to make people
predominantly joyful or sad, regardless of how well they are married and
irrespective of whether they are married at all.

Moreover, there are always a number of independently variable external
influences which operate to make people glad or unhappy. Can we demand
of marriage that it counteract the effects of toothache or bankruptcy?
When affliction comes from an outside source, it may be more painful to
a good husband or wife than to a bad one. A man may feel a failure more
poignantly because he sees that it affects his family. A personal
attachment always [p.150] involves the risk that we may have to share
sympathetically in pain which would not touch us otherwise. A family is
a hostage given to fortune, which makes us more sensitive than we would
otherwise be to the buffetings of an unkind world. How unfair,
therefore, to require of marriage that it guarantee happiness to us. The
hedonistic classification is misleading. Keyserling does well to warn us
that marriage may be an essentially tragic situation. However desirable
a happy marriage may be, we cannot accept the distinction between happy
and unhappy marriages as the most significant one for those who wish to
see clearly into the nature of marriage,

The purely economic distinction between richer and poorer families is a
crude variant of the hedonistic classification. When people say of a
girl that she is happily married, they often mean nothing more than that
she is married to a man who is supporting her in comfort, and when they
say of a marriage that it did not turn out well, they often mean simply
that the family cannot pay its grocery bills. Inasmuch as a certain
minimum of economic success is always necessary in order to lift human
life above the brute level, there is a material precondition to the
functioning of the family. This fact must be taken seriously into
account by young lovers, however impatient they may be of material
obstacles to their desires. But once the subsistence level is reached,
any further variation in the prosperity of the family has only a
superficial relation to true domestic excellence. Dr. Hamilton, in his
research on marriage, reached the conclusion that dis- contented wives
or husbands who complain of money troubles in the home are usually
making use of the money trouble as a peg upon which to hang some
resentment [p.151] which results from a deeper cause, and that there is
no significant correlation between financial success and marriage
satisfaction.

If neither the biological principle nor the principle of conformity to
convention nor the hedonistic principle adequately defines the
functioning or measures the success of the natural family, where is a
more adequate criterion to be found? Such a criterion is actually
implicit in the definition of marriage and family, and needs only to be
deduced from premises already established.

Marriage, it will be recalled, is a sex relationship considered in its
aspect of duration. The time element enters into marriage as an
essential part thereof, whereas children are only a contingent
consequence. The roughest and simplest test of a good marriage is
actually the endurance test. The first function of a marriage is to
last. If the purposes of those who marry do not include the intention
that the relationship is to persist through a period of time, there is
actually no marriage at all.

Applying this test roughly to the marriages that we know, we ask of
them: Do they last? If the marriage ends in a divorce court, we consider
it a failure. Whenever other things are equal, the success of a marriage
is directly proportioned to its permanence. A period of time is
necessary in order that the family may gain an individual character and
develop a distinctive organization by the successive laying down of new
strata of habit. The qualities which are legitimately sought in domestic
life are time-given qualities. The ideals and purposes which are proper
to marriage are those which permit of permanence. True enough, people do
not all live at the same tempo; it is possible that some marriages which
last [p.152] only a few years may be productive of more positive
domestic achievement than others which last till death. But aside from
differences in the rate of living, the social convention or individual
purpose which limits the duration of a marriage limits also its
excellence.

For instance, there are the conventional ideas of the Moors of the
Sahara, according to which frequent divorce is required. It is
considered a disgrace to remain long married to the same person. One who
has failed to divorce his wife after a reasonable time conceals the fact
as the young American in a small town conceals the evidence of an
illicit love affair. And again, there is a famous beauty whose merest
flirtation is followed eagerly by the international press. Every two or
three years she divorces one husband and marries another. It is hardly
credible that this woman's ideals of marriage are such that she enters
upon every one of these marriages with an identical aspiration toward
permanence, and that two or three years suffice in each case to
disillusion her anew. Much more probably her ideal and purpose is such
that marriage is to her a thing that burns itself out quickly. In so far
as the time factor is concerned, the social convention of the Moors and
the personal attitude of the actress are definitely inferior to
conventions and ideals which seek permanence. This judgment is based
upon an absolute and universal quality of marriage.

The time element, however, is not the only factor in absolute domestic
excellence. There is at least one other aim which family life should
attain. This additional aim is deduced from the personal character of
the family relationship, just as the permanence aim is deduced from the
temporal quality of marriage.

[p.153] Given the natural family, what is the necessarily characteristic
activity or interrelation of parts to which we can give the name of
function, and by which we can measure success?

Because the family consists of determinate members, the interrelation of
its parts follows the laws of a personal relationship. This would be
impossible if the family membership were substitutive.

Since the characteristic behavior of the family follows the laws of
personal relationship, it is free, that is to say, it arises within
total, unitary personalities and is not imposed by external
circumstances.

Arising within a total personality this behavior is necessarily
motivated, for it is in motivated behavior that the personality operates
as a principal cause.

The quality of the motive in this behavior is also determined by the
laws of personal relationship. It necessarily envisages another member
of the family as an end-in-himself, a complete object of value and
loyalty.

Thus benevolent activity, arising from a sentiment of paramount loyalty,
is the characteristic activity of the family members. The success of a
family can be judged by the degree in which it manifests this
characteristic mode of conduct.

These deductions are, of course, implicit in the whole system of
definitions thus far presented and discussed. The domestic man naturally
appears as the ideal of conduct within the family. The success of a
family is to be measured by the degree to which the members approximate
in their conduct the behavior of the domestic man.

This is, after all, neither more nor less than that "affectional"
function which, according to Professor Og[p.154]burn, is the one service
the family continues to perform for the young people of the Occident.
Let us imagine a family in which no members have the domestic attitude,
and each acts solely for himself. If there is any exchange of services
between family members the exchange takes place on a strictly measured
basis of barter and price. No one allows the interests of any other
member to enter into his personal calculations. Judged by external
signs, this family is normal. The neighbors report no scandal, a
biologist observing the family notes the presence of children to whom,
as the sociologist would testify, the social heritage is being regularly
transmitted. An economist may contribute the information that the family
pays its bills, and a wandering novelist may search in vain in this home
for the sense of tragic unhappiness. But domestic theory is not
satisfied. In the eyes of domestic theory, this family does not fulfill
its functions. It may suffice as a breeding establishment, a school, or
a hotel, but as a family it leaves the important things undone.

The normal young men and women of our day think first of affection when
they think of marriage. Children come later; the economic argument is
usually against marriage rather than in favor of it. Marriages are
launched in affection with the purpose that the affection shall last.
This function (described by lovers in an infinite number of ways) is for
us the true function of the family.

In setting the purpose and estimating the success of a marriage two
principal factors are therefore to be computed. On the one hand the
intensity of domestic interaction; on the other hand the duration of the
marriage. [p.155] These are two independent variables. A marriage might
last long with a minimum of domestic interaction, or it might be quickly
terminated, although it had been during its brief existence a field for
the intensive play of benevolent activity and appreciation. The best
marriage is that which is at once most permanent and most highly charged
with domestic interaction.

[p.156]

WHEN the two authors of this treatise set their minds to the making of a
theory of family life they hoped to free themselves from false
standards, and to discover a consistent inner meaning in married life in
terms of which they could measure their hopes and their achievements. If
there is an art or a technique in marriage as there is in dentistry or
civil engineering, it should be possible to know a good family from a
bad one as one knows a good dentist from an incompetent practitioner.
The trouble with so many of these classifications of families is that
they fix upon the fortuitous and inconsequential aspects of domestic
life, and miss its essential core.

There are, of course, as many ways of classifying families as there are
conceptions of family function. The fecund marriage can be contrasted
with the barren, or we can contrast the families which conform to our
institutional requirements with those that fail to conform. Or from a
broader point of view we can contrast various marriage institutions:
polygyny, polyandry, monogamy. We can take happiness or unhappiness,
these ultimate categories of psychology and ethics, and use them as
ultimate categories of domestic life. We can classify families as rich
and poor. But these classifications do [p.157] domestic excellence. None
of them take note of the presence or absence (through time) of domestic
interaction. The principles of domestic theory imply a new order of
domestic types, a new way of envisaging success in marriage.

Let us go back to our original concept of the natural family as a
kinship group consisting of husband and wife with possible children,
held together in a relationship of personality. This family functions to
the extent that its members manifest toward each other the domestic type
of behavior; domestic activity on the one hand, appreciation on the
other. The distinction between functioning and nonfunctioning families
is the fundamental distinction for us.

In the course of time each family develops an individual character or
system, made up of interrelated habits and mutually understood meanings.
Domestic behavior can enter to a greater or lesser extent into the
formation of these family systems. The extent to which a family is
functioning is thereby registered in its habit system.

There are four principal levels upon which the functioning of the family
can proceed. These four levels correspond to the four ways in which it
is mathematically possible to combine the two modes of domestic
behavior. We will call these four levels of domestic interaction: (1)
symmetrical, (2) asymmetrical, (3) unilateral, and (4) nondomestic or
economic. Behavior upon each of these levels tends to develop its
distinct species of domestic system, which can be known as (1) the
romantic, (2) the pseudo-patriarchal (or pseudo-matriarchal), (3) the
pseudo-parental or biological, and (4) the impersonal. These levels of
behavior and these domestic systems are [p.158] ideal types which actual
families approach but do not attain. They serve us, thereby, as
standards wherewith to measure achievement and success in marriage. They
afford us a scale by which we can evaluate different factors in a
marriage situation. They give us a common measure by which we can
compare different family institutions.

The four levels of domestic behavior can be illustrated by diagram. (See
page 159.)

If each member of the family acts domestically and appreciates the
domestic activity of the other, the family is functioning on a
symmetrical level, and developing a romantic character; if only one
member acts domestically, and the other merely appreciates his activity,
the functioning is asymmetrical. If a member acts domestically, but his
activity goes unappreciated, the functioning is on the unilateral level,
and the resulting system is called pseudo-parental because it resembles
the natural relationship of a parent to an infant. The lowest level is
the nonfunctioning level. The relationship among the members is lacking
in all domestic quality. The life of the family goes on as if the home
were merely a market for the exchange of services. There may be equality
between the members, but there is no manifestation of the domestic
attitude.

In O. Henry's charming Christmas story, _The Gift of the Magi,_ the
husband sells his watch to buy a comb for his wife's hair, while the
wife sells her hair to buy a chain for his watch. When both melt
together in mutual appreciation of the sacrifice that each has made for
the other, they share in the mystical gift of the Wise Men. This story
illustrates domestic behavior on the highest symmetrical level, where
there is cherishing and appre[p.160]ciation on both sides. Out of such
conduct as this a family develops a romantic character.

[p.159]

  THE FOUR TYPES OF THE NATURAL FAMILY

  SYMMETRICAL LEVEL: ROMANTIC SYSTEM

  _Activity ↣ Appreciation_
  _Appreciation ↢ Activity_

  Illustration: O. Henry's story; "The Gift of the Magi"

  or

  _Activity ↣ No response_
  _No response ↢ Activity_

  This is an unstable variant of the Romantic System.

  ASYMMETRICAL LEVEL: PSEUDO-PATRIARCHAL SYSTEM

  _Activity ↣ Appreciation_

  or

  _Activity ↣ No response_
  _Appreciation ↢ Activity_

  Shaw's "Candida"; Ibsen's "Doll's House"; Barrie's "What Every Woman
  Knows". The ideal family of the Victorian age.

  UNILATERAL LEVEL: PSEUDO-PARENTAL SYSTEM

  _Activity ↣ No response_

  Flaubert's "Madame Bovary".

  NONDOMESTIC LEVEL IMPERSONAL SYSTEM

  _Neither Benevolent Activity nor appreciation_ / _Neither Benevolent
  Activity nor appreciation_

  Marriage of State; marriage for family alliance, for duty, for
  convenience.

[p.160] It is a matter of record in many family case histories that
young people infused with romantic feeling toward each other will
sometimes devote all their thought and energy to the service of each
other, quite without noticing the benefits that they are receiving from
each other. Eventually each one notices that his good works are
unappreciated. The result is a disillusionment which lowers the level
upon which the family functions, even to the extent of killing all
domestic activity. This variant of the romantic system is therefore very
unstable. The danger is especially threatening to the family which
consists of two extraverts.

An illustration of the pseudo-patriarchal system is found in that family
in which the husband is deemed the fount from which all good things
flow, while the wife, incapable of any substantial contribution,
receives the good things bestowed upon her and responds with
appreciation. Domestic behavior is especially likely to run on the
pseudo-patriarchal level if one member of the family has a pronounced
superiority to the other, physically, culturally, or economically. In
this situation we find the clinging-vine wife whose economic dependence
has become so morbidly overemphasized that she actually becomes a moral
dependent, unable to face the most insignificant decision in her
personal life without referring to her husband. There is also the
hired-entertainer type of husband whose wealthy wife drags him around as
a social ornament. If one member is for a long time an invalid in the
care of the other, the level of domestic behavior is likely to be
asymmetrical, with all the activity [p.161] on one side and all the
appreciation on the other. The Victorian family, with its pale women and
bewhiskered men, was likely to develop a pseudo-patriarchal character.

When it comes to be accepted in any family that all initiative must come
from the husband, while the wife's role is merely to perform her set of
customary duties and render thanks, then the level of domestic behavior
is pseudo-patriarchal. If these roles are reversed as between husband
and wife, the system is pseudo-matriarchal. A marriage between an
introvert and an extravert is likely to function on this level.

When the level of domestic behavior is unilateral, the relationship of
husband and wife approaches that of a parent and infant. The man who
serves a selfish and unappreciative wife will excuse her faults as he
would those of a naughty child; the wife who lavishes her love upon an
unresponsive or irresponsible husband is playing the part of a mother to
him, and satisfies the maternal side of her nature in her unthanked
efforts. Sometimes domestic behavior drops to the unilateral level
because of the profound preoccupation of one member of the family with
some outside interest -- the husband with his business, the wife with
social affairs. A not uncommon instance of unilateral behavior is that
of the family in which the wife, because of excessive attention given to
the children, has come to neglect her husband, who none the less goes on
making sacrifices for her. Generally speaking, however, the unilateral
system is extremely unstable unless the relationship is assimilated to
that of parent and child.

When domestic behavior is quite absent from the life of the family, the
marriage is placed frankly on a profit[p.162]ivity basis. The husband is
the meal ticket, the wife the housekeeper or plaything. Each one gets
what he pays for and pays for what he gets. It may happen, just as it
happens in the business world, that one member will occupy the more
advantageous position, and may be able to exact more and give less than
the other. In the extreme case the woman is a purchased slave, bought
and paid for, and maintained at a profit to her master.

These levels of benevolent interaction are comparable to the marks on
the levees which indicate the height to which the water has risen. And
it is one of the complexities of the technique of marriage that it can
apply itself both to navigating upon the level of domestic interaction
that happens to exist and to manipulating the level. The married pair
are like voyagers upon a stream of their own creating. The level of the
water limits in some ways the possibilities of their voyaging. When the
water is low and shallow there are many places they cannot reach without
going aground, and perhaps there are great dangers from rocks and snags
upon the river bottom. All these things are to be taken into account by
the prudent navigator.

If, then, he runs aground, it may be that nothing will save him but an
opening of flood gates to raise the level. Such episodes are common
enough in domestic life; a disaster suffered by one serves to shake the
other out of selfish habits and to release a flood of sympathy and
benevolence. Many of the stories of married life which are recounted
more or less from experience by the professional novelists and the
amateur gossips are simply accounts of changes in the behavior level of
some family.

Thus in the life history of a family there may be [p.163] progress from
a lower to a higher level of domestic behavior, or there may be
retrogression. The marriage which is made on a purely business basis may
develop a romantic level of behavior. The marriage which starts out
romantically may deteriorate to a mere economic level of existence. The
true measure of achievement and success in marriage is the level of
domestic behavior attained and the type of family system developed. The
most successful marriage is that which most continuously maintains
domestic behavior at the symmetrical level and most nearly approaches
the romantic system in its organization.

This gives us a scale of values wherewith we can compare individual
families. We can use the same standard in comparing domestic
institutions because these may exert pressure toward a higher or lower
level of family life, although they cannot guarantee any achievement.
This scale of values is not a mere expression of the current prejudice
of the younger generation in the Western World; it is a scale of values
which inhere in marriage itself, as a universal fact in nature,
independently of transitory institutional changes or shifting habits of
thought.

Let us consider a case history. All of Ellen's friends declare that her
marriage was a great mistake, and those who knew Dick in college lament
the evident fact that his marriage was a failure. These are the facts.
Dick was brilliantly completing his advanced work in biology in a
university, when he met Ellen. They married. He planned to go on with
his work, while she helped to support the two of them. They planned not
to have a child until Dick should have completed the work for his
degree, [p.164] but their plan miscarried, Ellen's baby came a year
after the marriage, the financial plans of the household were wrecked.
Dick had to give up his college work and went into the crockery business
as a wholesale salesman where he made just enough to keep Ellen and the
baby in comfort. But Ellen was distressed. It hurt her that the marriage
had caused Dick to sacrifice his career. She determined to find work,
and save money, in order to make it possible for Dick to pick up his
scientific work again. By taking a secretarial position, and paying part
of the salary to have the baby cared for during the day, she was able to
save several hundred dollars in the course of a year. But the strain was
too much for her; her health broke down, all the savings were consumed
in caring for her, and the family came out of the episode heavily in
debt, with the possibility of Dick's returning to his profession much
dimmer than it had been before, and Ellen's health rendered permanently
delicate. Dick adjusted himself to the new situation, put his best
efforts into his lob, and had risen to a position of some responsibility
when his wife's illness made it imperative to move to a different
climate. He sold his equity in his house, borrowed money from a friend,
and set up as a small farmer in Arizona. There wife, and child blossomed
in health, despite the poverty and hard work of the farm. It seemed that
the child, now ten years old, was compensation for the life aims that
had been surrendered on his account. The father saved enough to buy a
microscope; the boy became interested in biology. And then, just
fourteen years after the marriage, the boy was killed in an automobile
accident.

There they are, no longer young, and their perfect [p.165] loyalty to
each other has borne nothing but bitter fruit. A soft-paunched preacher
may speak of their deeper joys, of their more profound satisfactions,
but such language merely insults despair. We know this situation for
what it is -- a cold tragedy of reality, and no buncombe will convince
us that it is otherwise. Judged by the test of happiness this marriage
did not succeed. By the economic test it was an evident failure. Even
biologically it has turned out to be barren in result, for these two
people are left alone, to grow old together. But the family life of this
pair persists throughout on the romantic level. It has been a succession
of sacrifices made by one member in the interests of the other. Dick
gave up his scientific career; Ellen used herself up in the fruitless
attempt to restore it to him. With failure patent on the surface, the
success of this family lies only in that domain where motive, not overt
accomplishment, is the essence of things. Despite all its clear
failures, this family has maintained the highest level of domestic
behavior. It has done that thing which it is the special function of the
family to do.

In the immortal dialogue at the house of Cephalus, Socrates undertook to
prove that the just man in misery, whom every one thought to be unjust,
was better off than the unjust man who had prosperity and good
reputation. Proof of such a thesis requires that it be established that
justice and injustice lie on a different dimension from pleasure and
pain. No amount of pleasure constitutes justice; no amount of pain is
equivalent to injustice. The two things are different as sound differs
from light. They obey different laws, and we measure them by different
measures. And so it is also with domestic behavior, [p.166] and the
functioning of the family. It is a level of experience and achievement
which has its own excellence peculiar to itself. To identify its
excellence with some other is to try to judge the apple tree by the
quality of the figs that grow upon it.

[p.167]

IT used to be that when people were married they were thought to be
through with making major decisions. Thereafter they had only to live
happily together so far as possible and to wait decently for God to send
them children. Now all this is changed.

No sooner are people married than they have another sweeping question of
life policy to decide. Shall they have a baby? They regard babies as
things that one can have or not as one chooses. Even if they are
ignorant of adequate birth control methods, they still think of
pregnancy as a state which they are free to accept or reject. Fiction
writers no longer drop their heroines at the betrothal or the wedding,
but follow them through this second crisis. Viña Delmar's _Bad Girl_ is
the story of a bride who finally made up her mind to have her baby,
after friends had been advising this way and that. That a book entitled
_A Child is Born_ should be crowned by the French Academy and that
Fannie Hurst should entitle her novel _A President Is Born_ gives
further evidence that our literary tradition is appropriating dramatic
elements of the marriage situation which the older tradition passed
over. Even the movies have developed a new pantomime for announcing a
pregnancy. We are coming to such a pass that the friends and neighbors
are less interested in knowing whether the new baby is a boy or [p.168]
girl than in guessing whether or not it was wanted and evaluating the
reports that it came contrary to plan. Most significant of all, there
has come forward for discussion a proposal for a species of marriage
contract in which the procreation of children is, at least temporarily,
excluded from the intention of the husband and wife.

In the mores of other civilizations than ours the practice of abortion
or infant exposure has been sanctioned as a means of disposing of
unwanted children. The ancient Greeks used exposure; the Polynesians
prefer abortion. The modern technique of contraception permits parents
to control the size of their families without resorting to the violence
of infanticide or abortion, but requires in consequence that they keep
the thought of whether or not they want children constantly in mind. The
only effective decision against children is that decision which is an
ever present article of faith.[15]

There is a certain stultifying habit of mind by which [p.169] merely
potential children are thought of as having supreme claims upon us, as
if they were already lying in their cribs and reaching up their hands.
This way of regarding the potentialities of the womb is much in use
among elderly sentimentalists who wage a war of propaganda against birth
control.

Of course, it is not the role of children in the family that is new; the
novelty is the need we now feel for understanding that role. Our
attitude toward the coming of children into our own family now involves
recurrent acts and decisions which we would like to base upon
intelligible principles. Children are a potentiality to be decided
about, not a _fait accompli_ to be reckoned with. We have, therefore, a
great practical interest in knowing how children fit into the
functioning of a family and into the individual life scheme.

In the organization of the family the children fill a triple rôle. They
are a kind of joint property, the cherished objects in the enjoyment of
which both parents participate and by which the husband and wife are
consequently drawn together. They are also competitors, competing
against the mother for the loyalty of the father, against the father for
the love and attention of the mother, against both for the things that
money can buy. When they grow older they come to participate as
independent personalities in the system of loyalty, benevolence, and
appreciation which arises out of domestic interaction. As cherished
objects, children tend to raise the level upon which families function;
as competitors, they tend to lower it; as participants, to complicate
it.

In a large family living in poverty a new baby is unnecessary as a means
of drawing the parents together [p.170] and relentlessly insistent as a
competitor. On the other hand, the firstborn child of a wealthy couple
is all-important as a mutually cherished object, and quite insignificant
as a competitor. And what part will the child play in the family when he
ceases to be a mere object, a pet, a thing to be taken care of, and
becomes an independent person? Perhaps the little infant which has
enhanced the domestic quality of the wealthy family will grow up to be
the spoiled child and irresponsible youth who injures the home he once
helped. Often the baby which placed a strain upon the resources of a
humble home becomes a key member of the family as he grows older.

How then are we to draw the line between the children that enhance
domestic life and those which degrade it? If we think of children as
infants merely, the question is whether the competitive potentialities
of the child overshadow its capacity to serve the family as a cherished
object. If we take the longer view and consider the whole period during
which the child is with the family, we must note that the relations of
children to each other and to their parents can be organized on any one
of the fundamental domestic systems: romantic, pseudo-patriarchal,
biological, or impersonal. The infant receives its mother's care but
renders no thanks; this is the unilateral situation. The child is
radiantly appreciative of the kindness it receives from its parents, but
assumes no responsibility for their welfare; this is the asymmetrical
situation. The youth begins to meet the parents on equal terms and to
take responsibility and thought for their happiness. The movement from
the lower to the higher level in the relationship of parent to child,
and of children [p.171] to each other, is the excellence which the
family derives from the growing up of its children.

Let us then examine these three aspects of the child's place in the
family. It is at once cherished object, competitor, and member.

The place of children as cherished objects in the family is best
understood if we compare them with other possible objects of mutual
interest to husband and wife. Two lovers may find themselves drawn
together by some aesthetic interest. They both like Dowson's poetry or
Russian music or football games. The fact that they share this interest
gives them means by which they can pleasantly do favors for each other.
They will get along better if both like football or both like Dowson
than if one has no interest in football and the other is bored by
Dowson. It is a well-recognized fact that love thrives upon such sharing
of interest.

There is another and somewhat higher level of common interest in a
thing. Socrates observed that the man who has made his own fortune loves
money with an additional intensity of feeling which men render to the
things they have themselves created. If husband and wife by joint
sacrifices have bought a home, or if they have planted on orchard or
garden, they will derive from these things not merely the satisfaction
of shared delight but also the satisfaction of a joint authorship. The
thing in which both feel their common authorship may be a piece of
property, or a song to which one has written the words and another the
music. The aesthetic side of sex life is developed upon this level. The
act of sex is an artistic product which both create and which both
should learn to enjoy.

[p.172] Sometimes the work which bears the impress of cooperation is not
merely a thing enjoyed and appreciated, but a thing which seems to have
ultimate ethical value. The missionary pair who have created a
flourishing missionary center where once the long grass grew, or the
revolutionary spirits who have risked and suffered together for the
world revolution, combine with the feeling of joint authorship a thrill
of comradeship in arms. They are comrades striving together for an
ideal. Their work is not of the present only, but of the future as well.

The baby appeals to its parents upon all of these levels. It is sweet,
it is "cute," it is attractive, it is interesting as it wiggles and
laughs. It is their own, and has taken its eyes from mama, its chin from
papa. It has brought with it the possibility of further achievements in
rearing it well, giving it every opportunity, making its life beautiful,
starting it on the road to the presidency. And even beyond this it has
some kind of an ultimate meaning which the parents grasp easily enough
without the implements of metaphysics. How often the old doctor has seen
the face of a new father light up with the tremendous realization of the
place of a child in the scheme of things!

Most married people want to have children. Dr. Hamilton's research
disclosed the fact that, of the two hundred spouses who were asked, "Do
you wish to have children?" only eighteen responded with an unqualified
"No." while ninety-two answered, "Yes," without reservation.

If we think of children simply as cherished objects, like old china,
rare books, or great causes, it is clear that some families have more
need of them than others. The lack of them may leave a great void in the
domestic life [p.173] of those who know no significant object of mutual
interest save sex play. But where a man and wife have some more ample
purpose which they pursue together, children are less necessary to them.
Their lives can be well lived without children. It may even happen that
children are an obstacle rather than an aid to the development of a high
level of domestic existence.

Here we must consider the competitive aspect of having children. Where
competition is present in a personal relationship, there is always great
likelihood that jealousy will enter. And even when no jealousies arise,
a child's competition may interfere with a domestic system. The mother
lavishes all her energy upon the child. It takes up time and attention
from everything else; especially it takes up the time that was
previously devoted to caring for the husband. The baby's diapers are
washed, but the husband's shirts are not ironed. There is a lapse in
domestic activity, a change in the ritual of the home which is not
merely a matter of new routine but of new interests. The level of family
life slips down from the romantic to the pseudo-patriarchal. Perhaps
jealousy supplants appreciation. This particular type of degradation is
so common to experience that young mothers are often vehement in
protesting that the baby will not make any difference in their relation
with their husbands. In Viña Delmar's _Bad Girl_, Dotty, whose domestic
life was already pseudo-patriarchal, declared when she decided to have
her baby that she would continue to love Eddie just as much as before.
But how can the competition of the child be met without destroying the
balance of the relationship of husband to wife?

There is always at hand a satisfactory solution to [p.174] this problem.
The husband must be so wrapped up in the child that he appreciates the
things done for it as if they were done for himself. And the marriage
partners must continue to regard their bond as paramount. Aside from
this spiritual means, there are two more or less mechanical devices for
accomplishing the same end. Nursemaids and governesses can take up so
much of the load of the child's care that the wife's preoccupation is
reduced to something more nearly equal to the husband's. This is the
device of the wealthy. The young people of meager means who must both
keep their jobs have worked out another solution. The husband and wife
share in the drudgery of caring for the child, and come thereby to share
a common attitude toward it.

When the fortunes of the family are such that the arrival of a baby
involves heavy sacrifices, a different kind of competition is often
introduced. Sometimes the sacrifice falls unequally upon the parents.
The father may have to give up his recreation, or the mother may
sacrifice a world of pleasant friendly contacts. Sometimes the
sacrifices are shared equally. An ambition to raise one's social status
is thwarted, or the family standard of living is brought below that
which the parents had regarded as a minimum for themselves. These
tragedies are so common, and the risk of them so obvious, that some of
the younger married people are almost savage in their determination to
beget no children.

The immediate effect of the arrival of a child upon the level of the
domestic activity of the family depends partly upon whether it is
received as a cherished object or as a competitor and partly upon the
level of domestic activity already reached by the husband and wife.

[p.175] In a family which is functioning on the nondomestic level a baby
which arrives as a competitor, demanding sacrifices, threatens the
profitivity of the marriage and hence renders it unstable. But babies
have a natural way of overcoming sales resistance to themselves. Even
though they appear to be competitors when they arrive, they may quickly
enough become cherished objects in which both parents can express their
loyalty to each other, and through which the level of domestic conduct
in the family is raised toward the symmetrical. This is a fact which so
often leads older people to advise younger ones to have children as an
antidote for selfishness.

A child is in every case a potent means of changing the level upon which
a family functions because the habits and routines of a childless family
are shattered when the baby comes. The baby requires the formation of
new habits and the organization of a new domestic system. The change is
especially marked when the parents have organized their play life in a
way that takes them constantly out of the house, to theater or party.
Unless they can find adequate ways of playing together at home, they
will come to feel keenly the competition of the child. The husband has
inherited from courtship days a standard gesture wherewith to give
expression to his affection for his wife -- he "takes her out". Now the
baby makes that gesture impossible, and nothing new is invented to take
its place. The comic strip situation in which the husband's play is
habitually away from his home, in poker game or bowling alley with his
male companions, is often a result of the disorganization of a romantic
routine which came about when the children were born. The change of
routine does not require a change in attitude and [p.176] loyalty, but
may give occasion for such a change. The romantic type of family life
may become pseudo-patriarchal, as in the case of the wife whose
paramount loyalty shifts from the husband to the child in the critical
years during which the baby requires constant attention. Or a
pseudo-patriarchal type of family may become romantic when the new
routine imposes such responsibilities upon the wife that she rises from
the status of a plaything and pet to that of an equal partner in the
home.

As the child grows to maturity he continues to be, as he was in infancy,
a cherished object and a rival. In addition thereto he becomes something
else: a member of the family.

Hitherto in this study we have had to do with personalities as completed
facts, but in the growing up of children we have to do with the creation
of personalities. The most adequate study of this process is made by the
psychoanalysts whose doctrine, as Malinowski aptly puts it, is a
doctrine of the influence of family life upon the human mind.[16]

Every individual first learns _self, love,_ and _hate_ in his family
environment. His first experience of love of an object other than
himself is parent-love. This is usually accompanied by an infantile
idealization of the parent which embeds itself so deeply in the
character that no subsequent experience ever cancels it out. Along with
object-love and self-feeling comes the experience of thwarted desires
and jealousy, which issues in an emotion of hatred. The emotions of
child toward parent are thus ambivalent: they include in themselves
elements of [p.177] loving and of hating. The first attachments which
these emotions make (to mother or father) and the subsequent
displacements of their object (ultimately from love of parent to love of
spouse) determine the love life of the individual. The degree to which
an individual is autonomous or dependent seems also to be determined by
early family environment. The child who is helped too much becomes
incapable of self-help. It is fortunately unnecessary here to engage in
the discussion of such mooted points as the importance of sexuality in
infant life and the universality of the OEdipus complex. These disputed
points of psychoanalytic doctrine come up for review only in connection
with the specific art of educating children. They are not directly
engaged in the question of whether to have children. What we have here
set forth is the generally accepted minimum hypothesis as to the
development of a personality in the family.

The important thing is that children do develop personalities, and that
this development takes place through time. Just as the growth of a love
relationship through stratification of habits requires time, so also the
physical and personality growth of children is a time-product. The
physical make-up of the species determines the main lines of the child's
development. As the infant ceases to be a mere bundle of pink protoplasm
he acquires a capacity for feelings of appreciation (object-love for
parents) and then, as conduct becomes more rational and autonomous, and
as he learns different skills, he acquires a capacity for benevolent
activity. The capacity for the opposite attitude and line of conduct is
of course acquired at the same time.

We have little control over the tempo of this develop[p.178]ment which
equips the child to participate on an equal footing with parents in the
reciprocities of domestic life. We cannot appreciably hasten or retard
the appearance of these capacities in a child. Thus the rate of growth
of a child sets an absolute time-limit for family life. The rearing of
offspring is a "work of long breath." For this reason, children bring
with them into a family something of a guarantee of stability for a
period of time. By requiring duration in a marriage they enhance the
absolute excellence thereof, and afford husband and wife more definite
tenure during which to build up family organization by stratifying
habits.

As the children come to enter fully into personal relationships with
each other and with the parents the family develops a subsidiary
structure of amazing complexity. No two families are alike. The simple
paths of loyalty between husband and wife are intersected by all kinds
of transverse loyalties or jealousies between parents and children and
among the children themselves.

The complexity of the fabric of personal relationships in a family which
includes children increases the artistic difficulty of building up a
good family organization. It is as if one undertook to paint upon a
larger canvas with more colors and a more intricate design. There is
more likelihood of botching the work, but the success is more
significant when it is achieved. The large natural family, knit together
by many intersecting and well contrived bonds of loyalty and
benevolence, is more durable because of its size. It approaches in this
respect the super-family kinship group (patriarchal or matriarchal)
which is immortal.

The structure of one of these natural families is an [p.179] artifact,
the creation of which is subject to certain elementary principles of
composition. The principal requirements are these: the family must
develop an adequate love attitude on the part of the children. But the
love attitude must be so contrived that its displacement outside the
family, by the marriage of the child, will be disastrous neither to the
parents nor to the new family which is established.

The ideal development of an adequate love attitude by the child occurs
when domestic interaction of parent and child begins on the unilateral
level, and rises through the asymmetrical to the symmetrical level of
interaction. For a short time the relation between parent and child can
display the full mutuality of the romantic system.

This movement of the children from the lowest to the highest level of
domestic behavior is much more rapid and complete if there are several
children. The only child, and sometimes the youngest child in a large
family, is likely to remain over-long on the asymmetrical level. He
expects everything from the parents and renders nothing to them. This
attitude sometimes becomes so fixed in childhood that full mutuality is
never learned. When the only child marries, the level of his domestic
behavior often continues asymmetrical and his own family develops only a
pseudo-patriarchal system. The lesson of mutuality is best learned in
play with brother or sister, and then extended to the parents. For this
reason there is an advantage in having one's children born within as few
years of each other as possible, for they best learn mutuality from
playmates of about their own age.

Since children advance more rapidly among themselves than with their
parents upon the line of domestic inter[p.180]action, it follows that an
ideal family of parents and children will consist of a number of
subsidiary domestic systems. Father and mother maintain, let us say, a
full romantic system between themselves. With their two boys of
high-school age they maintain a pseudo-patriarchal system. But the
brothers, as between themselves, interact domestically on the
symmetrical level. Theirs is an independent romantic system. And they in
turn engage in a pseudo-patriarchal system with their younger sister.
Thus step by step, the children advance in the domestic scale.

The existence of these subsidiary systems in a family leaves the parents
more free to keep open the straight path of loyalty between themselves.
Their attention and interest is not so constantly deflected from each
other as it would be if the children were not filling their own lives
with brother and sister companionship. Thus an important principle of
composition in family life requires a kind of balancing of child groups
against the parent group.

The second principle of composition requires that the husband-wife
relationship must always be dominant. While the children are young the
solidarity of father and mother must be maintained in order to keep the
confidence of the children. And when the children grow up this
solidarity is even more necessary. For if the interests and loyalties of
the family are so disposed that the children mean more to the parents
than the parents mean to each other, the old family organization is
difficult to unravel when the children are setting up new families of
their own.

For the same flow of time which serves to build up a [p.181] domestic
system in the interplay of love and habit, and which carries the
children from one level of domestic interaction to another, must
eventually withdraw the children from the parents and leave the natural
family to be in old age what it was in youth: a union of husband and
wife, alone against the world. The same principles of autonomy and
isolation which made their own natural family the thing that it is must
exclude them from the families their children set up.

Here again the significant distinction between primary and secondary
family membership comes into play. Primary membership is necessary and
coextensive with the life of the family; secondary membership is
contingent and transitory.

Those who bring children into the world will do well to ponder upon the
inevitable transience of their claims upon their offspring. This second
parturition, whereby children tear themselves from the family, may be
more painful than the first when they separate from the body of the
mother. A kinship group institution like the Chinese or Jewish kinship
organization may render it possible for parents to hold on to their
children permanently, but such claims are enforced at the expense of the
natural family, which finds its isolation and autonomy compromised by
such institutions as these.

Parents have every chance to put their relationship with their children
upon such a footing of love and respect that they will always be
welcomed in their children's homes as well-loved friends and tactful
guests. But they have no real claim upon their children, and if they try
to assert such a claim they become not friends and guests but intruders.
Dr. Hamilton's research tends [p.182] to confirm statistically the
prevalent belief that visiting relatives endanger good domestic life.

These are harsh facts which have in them the seeds of many tragedies.

  It repeatedly happens in modern psychiatry that broken-hearted
  individuals come for aid when the parent and child relation, having
  been abnormally close, is broken by other attachments on the part of
  the child. This is frequently the case when the son or daughter wishes
  to marry. "I wouldn't stand in the way of his happiness, but I feel
  that he is making a serious mistake," a woman will declare, trying to
  rationalize her desire to hold her son in perpetuity. "I'll gladly
  give my daughter to a man I can trust -- but I don't like this young
  fellow," a man will say, with the conviction that his daughter is a
  possession he can bestow or keep for himself as he wishes. . . . We
  have mistakenly thought that the parent and child relation was beyond
  question a permanent and enduring relationship. . . . A little thought
  can show the absurdity of our common attitude. There can be but one
  real love relation and that is the relation of marriage, the spiritual
  mate relation. The parent relation may, or may not, have elements of
  enduring spiritual attachment; but if it remains it exists not because
  of the physical bond between parent and child, but despite that fact
  and because of adult companionship.[17]

Certainly the parents can continue to cherish their children throughout
life -- the children owe nothing to the parents. The service which
children can be expected to render to parents lies solely in their
quality as cherished objects. Any other returns from them is without
significance in the true scale of domestic values. It may happen that
the rearing of a number of children turns out to be a profitable
enterprise. The indigent old [p.183] mother who has worked all her life
for her children may be given a comfortable place in her daughter's
home, thereby finding her reward. But any insurance company can offer a
more attractive and less hazardous plan for assuring comfort in old age.
And those parents who try to make a quick profit on the children -- the
mill pappies who regularly take the pay envelopes of their entire brood
or the farmers who are always keeping the boy home from school -- are
not thereby maintaining a higher level of domestic life. There used to
be current a joke about the farmer who complained, when his son ran away
from home to go to school, "It's downright stealin'; I raised that boy
for my own use!"

The claim that the sacrifice of the parent imposes a debt upon the child
is a ludicrous attempt to use a business-basis argument in a place where
relationships are not on a business basis. The claim is bad enough in
the case of an unwanted child. "Edward, my son, you cost me a lot of
trouble. Mama and I were going to have a trip to Europe when you had to
come along and spoil the whole plan. Won't you help me in the shop this
summer, so that we can make enough money to take the trip next year?"
There is something in this presentation which appeals to an unspoiled
sense of justice. If Edward is placed under an obligation to which he
did not consent, he recognizes that his parents also were tricked by
nature without their consent. There is some sense to the idea of a
child's obligation to his parents under these circumstances. But if
Edward was planned for and hoped for and came in response to an ardent
desire of his parents, there is a certain cheapness in imagining that he
is bound by an obligation to which his parents had consented, but
[p.184] he had not. Let Edward and his father plan their summer in a
spirit of mutual consideration and affection. Theirs is a personal
relationship of which the essence is sympathy; the fiction of a contract
is woefully out of place. A business man who would try to establish an
obligation in his favor by some comparable unilateral decision would be
guilty of sharp practice. Parents who willfully beget a child with the
idea that it will owe them something because of their part in bringing
it into the world are like those canvassing agents who leave a vacuum
cleaner on your doorstep and then try to make you pay for it. Children
are not an investment, and cannot be expected to pay for themselves.

More subtle but almost as pernicious as the investment attitude toward
children is the attitude of those who seek to achieve vicariously in
their children a realization of the ambitions which their own lives did
not fulfill. It is well enough to aid the child in any specific
direction, but it is not fair to send him into the world charged with a
specific duty inherited from his parents' failure. Edna Ferber has a
story of a mother who, because she had been thwarted in her girlhood
ambition to go on the stage, forced a stage career upon her unwilling
daughter, almost ruining the daughter's happiness thereby. One can
certainly take legitimate pride in any excellence which his children may
display and in any success they may achieve. Their character and success
may be a result of the parents' careful artistry. However, the true
artistry of parenthood requires that the children be regarded as ends in
themselves, and not as means to the achievement of some other end. And
this is a fair test of the legitimacy of the parent's attitude: is he
bringing up his chil[p.185]dren for some other purpose than their own
welfare? If his object is to achieve some definite end through them, it
is not a sound parental attitude.

And the children, regarded as ends-in-themselves, are in a sense ends
that cannot be attained. The parent's hand is withdrawn from a task hall
done. The child may receive a sound body and know how to use it well,
but this is only a beginning, a potentiality. Just as the very existence
of children in a family is a contingency rather than an inevitable
consequence of marriage, so in the development of the children through
life they always present to the parent an aspect of possibility and
hence of uncertainty. A picture can be painted, framed, and hung; a
house can he designed, built, completed; but children and grandchildren
are always reaching toward an unknown future and the stamp of finality
is not set upon them. It is not good that the parent should see them
reach the limit of their potentiality. The death of a child in the
parent's lifetime compels the parent to judge of that life as of a thing
complete. However beautiful the life of the child may have been, however
well-rounded his achievements, the closing out of his life has, from the
parent's standpoint, a tragic quality which is not present when the
parent's death is seen from the standpoint of the child. For one of the
things we desire in children is that undetermined stake in the future,
that lottery chance in Destiny, which permits us to make of our own
flesh and blood the persons of a dream.

Those who are deciding whether to have children or not must search their
minds deeply indeed. The sentimental authors whose very typewriters are
tuned to the "patter of little feet" and who preach the gospel that
[p.186] children are necessary in all lives and under all circumstances
are quite out of touch with the realities. Children do not fit in the
same way into every life plan, nor do they make an identical
contribution to every family in which they appear. There are always
advantages and disadvantages to be balanced against each other.

The value of children in the family, estimated in the scale of domestic
values, depends first upon their quality as cherished objects as
balanced against their quality as competitors and second upon their
behavior as members of the family. This being their domestic value, it
is fitting to consider further their value in terms of individual
purpose, and their place in an individual's life plan.

For children are, in one way, inadequate as an aim in life. For a
certain period they can engage all our artistry and workmanship. There
is not one of our capacities, from money-making to self-discipline, that
cannot be drawn upon to contribute to their welfare. But then the time
comes when the children recede from us half-finished. We can neither
apply a whole life to them nor regard them as our finished and definite
accomplishments

At the same time the satisfaction in creating a child, taken in all its
implications, with the art that can go into directing his education and
with the moral discipline of living to keep his respect, has a kind of
original value which does not seem to be derived from anything else. The
sophisticated man tends to lose touch with natural values. Even eating
and drinking lose their physiological primacy in his mind, and tend to
seem merely the parts of a social ritual. Children restore to a life
some of its primal contact with the soil.

Name any other object of effort and art, and the skep[p.187]tical mind
will pick its values to pieces and prove that it does not constitute an
adequate purpose for a life. But in the creation of children there is a
life-purpose which resists skeptical corrosion. For if the creation of a
child is my purpose, then my object is not less real than myself, and is
more lasting than any other object I might achieve. Time mocks the
vanity of those who seek permanence in anything but life. Stone cities
bury themselves in their own debris, the cultivated lands sink beneath
the sea, the language of the song dies and is forgotten with the song
itself. But something of the self of every parent carries on into the
future.

[p.188]

THE marriage customs of the Western World attribute an enormous
importance to the sex-monopoly aspect of marriage. Virginity is
protected before marriage; adultery is prohibited afterward. Save for
those who have remarried, no one can with propriety acknowledge having
had sex intercourse with more than one person in the entire course of
his life. Dr. Hamilton found only forty-one out of a hundred men, only
fifty-three out of a hundred women, who had never violated this rule.

This ideal of sex monopoly, though historically traceable to an attitude
of contempt for the world, the flesh, and the devil, has outlived the
disintegration of the general otherworldly point of view of the Church,
and presents itself to-day as a special ethic of sex, quite separated
from any general ethic of asceticism.

Most of our positive teaching on sex has, until recently, focussed about
the sex-monopoly ideal. The pressure of early education taught to youth
one lesson only regarding sex: that it was a forbidden thing. For the
benefit of adults the community maintained a perpetual campaign against
adultery and fornication. The aesthetics of sex was neglected and even
the bare physiology of sex was comparatively unknown. Only so much
thinking and [p.189] talking about sex was permitted as seemed necessary
to protect virginity and prevent adultery.

A consequence of this social pressure has been such a linking of
marriage and sex monopoly that the two are regarded as inseparable. The
conventional courtship involves a promise "to be true," _i.e.,_ to
refrain from intercourse with another. If either party to a marriage has
had previous sex experience, the fact is one to be concealed or
forgiven. If there is an infringement of the monopoly after marriage,
divorce is thought to be the appropriate remedy.

This identification of marriage with sex monopoly explains the fact that
the so-called "revolt" against marriage in Western lands is pretty much
a mere attack upon the sex-monopoly ideal. The belief that marriage is
"bankrupt"[18] which finds expression in contemporary literature usually
focusses on the contention that sex monopoly is indefensible or
unattainable. It follows from the nature of these criticisms that any
adequate theory of marriage must expound in some self-consistent fashion
the relation of marriage to sex monopoly.

In former times it sufficed to denounce as libertines any who sought to
defy the commands of the community in sex life. To-day such
denunciations are inadequate. People are changing their attitudes. Dr.
Hamilton's research uncovered the fact that of his one hundred men
subjects, only fifteen, and of his hundred women subjects only
thirty-two, thought adultery difficult or impossible to justify. He
classified the attitudes of these two hundred spouses toward adultery as
follows:

  [p.190] Conservative view: 47 spouses or 24 per cent
  Liberal view: 124 spouses or 62 per cent
  Radical view: 29 spouses or 14 per cent

An increasing number of people hold that the business in hand is not to
determine whether the commands of the community have been complied with,
but to find out whether the community ought to give such commands.

Broadly stated, the question is what values are gained or lost by
reserving sex intercourse as an exclusive secret connived in by two
persons alone throughout life. In these days which have witnessed the
falling away of the ideal of asceticism in general, the rationale of the
sex-monopoly ideal of marriage has come to rest chiefly upon three
considerations: an aesthetic appeal, a jealousy danger, and a parenthood
risk.

First, of aesthetic appeal: It must be recognized that coitus when
artistically consummated is a supreme and unique instance of benevolent
interaction. The essence of the domestic values finds expression
therein. There is reciprocity of tenderness and appreciation; there is
isolation and personal intimacy. Everything that protects and develops
these potentialities of the sexual act is valuable to marriage.

The value of coitus as benevolent interaction is increased to the extent
that the act is guarded as a unique and personal possession which the
husband and wife share with each other, but not with the world. Dr.
Hamilton found that only 29 per cent of the men who committed adultery,
and 17 per cent of the women, regarded their marriage as happy. The very
characteristics of the sex act which render it so supremely significant
as an expression of the paramount-loyalty attitude of [p.191] husband
and wife render it dangerous to that loyalty when it is consummated
under conditions of adultery.

closely related to these considerations is one of the arguments for
chastity before marriage: It is urged that the exploration of the
aesthetic possibilities of sex is an excellent coeducational experience
to be reserved for the threshold of domestic life.

Sex monopoly, because of this aesthetic appeal, makes a positive
contribution to the excellence of domestic life. Conversely, sex
liberty, by introducing a rivalry risk, has a negative influence upon
the level of domestic behavior. There is always a chance that a liaison
with a third party may draw the loyalty of the husband or wife away from
the family. Sometimes the withdrawing of loyalty is permanent, sometimes
only transitory. And even if paramount loyalty is not for a moment
withdrawn, and no significant transfer of affection takes place, it
remains probable that the most transitory outside liaison may withdraw
from the marriage partner some of the warmth of response that would
otherwise be his, and therefore establish competition in a domain which,
in the best interests of the natural family (because of the unique
potentialities of coitus as benevolent interaction), should be beyond
the reach of competition.

In addition to rivalry risk a parenthood risk is involved because
promiscuous liaisons on the part of the wife leave the husband uncertain
whether the offspring is biologically his own, and the uncertainty may
ruin the role that children play in the family life. The husband's
promiscuity may confront the wife with a call to make sacrifices for
some illegitimate child toward which she has no personal attachment
whatsoever. Where the sex [p.192] connection is intended to be
transitory, that is to say, where no real marriage takes place, the
parenthood risk is especially serious because of the difficulty of
providing for the child. The development of contraceptive technique has
diminished but not eliminated the parenthood risk in sex liberty.

Before casting up the account and reckoning in terms of domestic values
the costs and credits of sex liberty, it must be noted that there are at
least four distinct ways in which the sex-monopoly ideal can be
violated, and that each type of violation has consequences peculiar to
itself. Two of these types of sex liberty involve a simultaneous
plurality of wives or mistresses, husbands or lovers, and the other two
of them a consecutive plurality.

One who is having more than a single sex-love affair going on at the
same time may be either adulterous or polygamous -- or neither. Whether
his situation is to be described by one or another of these terms
depends primarily upon whether the relationships are permanent or
transitory. If a sex relationship is permanent, if its duration aspect
is dominant, then it follows from the fundamental definitions of the
principles of marriage that the union must be regarded as a marriage,
and the persons as members of a natural family. The marriage license is,
of course, not the decisive thing. If a person who is continuing in such
an enduring relationship should indulge in a transitory affair, his
action must be regarded as adultery. But if the relationship with the
additional man or woman is in like degree permanent and enduring, the
situation cannot be defined as adultery, but must he called polygamy.
The laws and conventions laid down by the [p.193] environing society
seem powerless to prevent true polygamy, however they may avoid giving
legal recognition thereto. A man who maintains wife and mistress
together on his great country estate, and another who rents one
expensive apartment for his lawful mate and another equally expensive
one for his equally permanent mistress, are both just as much the heads
of polygamous families as is any Moslem sheik or Indian nabob. The
distinction made between the transitory liaison and the permanent
attachment is here the fundamental one.

If neither attachment has a permanence aspect, the principles of
marriage are not directly engaged.

Somewhat more readily tolerated in Occidental civilization is a
plurality of liaisons which follow each other consecutively, provided
each liaison is registered in a wedding, and its termination told off by
means of a divorce. Since the legal and institutional aspect of marriage
does not give the measure of its more universal significance, the
violation of sex monopoly involved in a series of matrimonial adventures
is not fundamentally different from the violation involved in a series
of unions without legal marriage. The principal difference between
absolutely unrestricted free love and easy divorce at the wish of either
party is simply that in the latter case the man and wife take the
community more fully into the secret of their intentions. Thus we can
regard all instances of a union which lasts for a time only and is then
supplanted by another union as belonging to a distinct class of
violations at the sex-monopoly ideal, for which we suggest the name
"love-tenure marriage"

For these marriages which are designed to end in divorce-at-will, or
these free-love unions, are usually [p.194] based upon a philosophy of
love which implies that love can unaccountably depart from a human
relationship, leaving the two ex-lovers no course but to part company.
The permanence of marriage is thus sacrificed in order that marriage and
love may always coincide. Quite different in spirit and in practice is
the revision of our code of sex morals which aims to permit experimental
sex relations until permanent marriage takes place. The new code asserts
that virginity need not be maintained until a permanent mate is found.
This ideal of conduct used to be tolerated as a standard for men only.
"A young man must sow his wild oats," was the saying. The novelty of
to-day is to see the standard proposed as one to be equally applicable
to men and women. Dr. Hamilton found that only forty-six out of the
hundred men and sixty-five out of the hundred women of his research were
virgins at marriage.

Here again we must beware of the danger of confusing the vital elements
of a marriage relationship with its merely institutional forms. Given
the situation as it stands in Occidental lands, the community is most
interested in demanding that some kind of a wedding ceremony should mark
any sex experiment, and, in fact, that the wedding should intervene
before coitus takes place. From the standpoint of the more general
principles of marriage decisive importance does not attach to the fixing
of the exact point in the development of an experimental relationship
where the wedding ceremony should occur, or even in the question of
whether or not there is any wedding ceremony at all. The important
distinction is not the one that the neighbors make between coitus in
wedlock and out of it, but rather the one that inheres in the [p.195]
mind of the participant: the distinction between experimentation on the
one hand and the establishing of something permanent on the other. Thus
the distinction between sex experiment cloaked by wedding and
experimentation not so covered can be disregarded.

Sex-experiment and love-tenure marriages, while alike in that they
permit a sequence of sex partnerships, are still to be distinguished
from the Don Juan pattern of sex life, which lays itself out as an
infinite series of equally transitory episodes of conquest. This is the
way of life of the true harlot or the perfect libertine: it is not
without its beauty -- as witnesses the story of Gengi -- but it is not
marriage. It is a perpetual quest for the new experience -- perhaps a
quest for perfection. It is inevitably impermanent. Marriage does not
enter at all into such lives, even though (as in Molière's _Don Juan_) a
wedding marks every conquest. From the standpoint of the principles of
marriage, this basis of sex life is hardly to be taken into account,
except in so far as the Don Juans interfere with the marriage destinies
of others.

In the flow of change that carries every life in its current, it can
happen that any one of these types of sex liberty can merge into
another, or can become monopolistic in fact. The transitory liaison or
the experimental affair can become permanent. The love-tenure marriage
can turn out to be a life-tenure marriage; adultery can become polygamy,
and the polygamous family, by the lapsing of all but one connection, can
revert to a monogamous basis.

Taking into account the possibility of such transitions as these, the
different types of sex liberty, simultaneous and consecutive, permanent
and transitory, experimental [p.196] and love-tenure, must make each its
own bargain with the sex-monopoly ideal.

To begin with, there are certain costs regularly to be assessed against
the notion that sex monopoly is a supreme end of married life. So far as
we can tell, human experience has pretty well demonstrated that absolute
sex monopoly enforced upon both partners in monogamous marriage is an
ideal rather than a practice. Dr. Hamilton's findings, that twenty-eight
out of the hundred men and twenty-four of the hundred women had
committed adultery, are significant in this connection. Sex liberty of
one kind or another is certainly common enough to be regarded as a
normal rather than an abnormal element in modern life. Conditions vary,
of course, in different places and in different social classes. With
regard to this situation, a general theory of marriage must answer the
question whether it is preferable to modify the ideal in conformity with
the practice or to continue the seemingly vain attempt to bring the
practice into line with the ideal.

The case against the sex-monopoly ideal is not so much its relative
inaccessibility as the gratuitous difficulties it introduces into
married life. The mere fact that an ideal is not attained would not
constitute a reason for abandoning or compromising it: perhaps it is
necessary that ideals should lie beyond the scope of practice; otherwise
they would be mere descriptive categories and not ideals at all. But we
can demand of an ideal that it lead us toward the most important and
significant things, not diverting our attention to superficialities and
trifles. We can also require of it that it become not a trap for us,
whereby we bring on our own ruin.

[p.197] The baneful effect of the sex-monopoly ideal appears in two
forms: first, in the form of certain measures taken to enforce monopoly,
and second, in the form of certain penalties exacted when monopoly is
violated. The costs of the enforcement measures must be borne whether or
not there is in fact a breach of monopoly.

The enforcement measure most effectively used to prevent the
"simultaneous" type of sex liberty is a strict taboo which exaggerates
and intensifies the rivalry risk already present in adultery and
polygamy. Jealousy, a by-product of love, furnishes a driving force
which impels each marriage partner to resent sex loyalty. Taboo, the
socially established prohibition, fixes upon adultery or polygamy as a
specifically objectionable act and defines every adulterous act as a
tort against the lawful wife or husband. The combination of these,
individual jealousy plus social taboo, causes each individual to tie up
his own self-respect with the sex fidelity of his spouse. This third
element is illustrated in the jokes about cuckolds which provide so much
of the comic relief in sixteenth century literature, in the notion that
a wife's faithlessness deprives the husband of his "honor," and in the
so-called "unwritten law" which even in modern times makes it difficult
to convict a "wronged" husband if he murders his wife's lover.

The taboo on adultery, together with the social convention whereby
punishment for violation of the taboo is visited not only upon the
violator but upon the spouse as well, serves to intensify the jealousy
attitude. Jealousy is indeed an irreducible fact in personal
relationships. It appears as a consequence of competition for the
loyalty of a personal object of affection. It expresses the
dis[p.198]satisfaction of the self when the personal relationship to the
other is not closed and complete. It is aroused by a child in the
family, by relatives, by friends. But when the competitor is a child,
relative. or guest, jealousy masks or transforms itself in deference to
social convention. Only when the competitor is a rival lover does
convention permit the complete unmasking of the feeling of jealousy. If
conventions required as much self-discipline in one's attitude as rival
for the affection of a spouse as one must maintain in tennis, politics,
or business, marriages would be better able to survive episodes of
adultery or suspicion of adultery.

The sex-monopoly ideal operates, therefore, in a vicious circle. The
social taboo stimulates jealousy and resentment; jealousy and
resentment, thus stimulated, render adultery destructive of marriage.
The prospect that adultery will mean divorce, and the total destruction
of a family, generates new fears which further sharpen jealousy and
resentment. The feeling of insecurity makes it more difficult to endure
humiliation and loss of face.

To the extent that the marriage partners accept this system of
convention and taboo, they accept also the consequence that every
violation of the sex-monopoly code is a violation of the engagement of
paramount loyalty. It is a symbol of disloyalty, a token that some other
interest than that of husband or wife has been preferred.

The destructive effect of this emphasis on exclusive sex possession
cannot be avoided by merely refraining from adulterous connections, for
the fears which are engendered extend to nonsexual attachments which
husband or wife may have. Pleasant and profitable friendships [p.199]
may have to be limited or sacrificed in deference to the duty of
forestalling all suspicion, and such restrictions, however rigorously
they be adhered to, may have a galling effect upon the spirit. Often the
most ridiculous jealousies are implemented and fostered by the
sex-monopoly ideal. A jealousy will fly back to the years before
marriage -- even to the years before acquaintance -- and concern itself
with the early chastity of the present spouse. Here a wife flies into a
passion if her husband chats for a moment with a female clerk, and there
a husband tries to keep his wife secluded in his apartment as if it were
a harem. And again there are unfounded and undefined forebodings of
disloyalties that may occur in the future. Fantasy conjures up a
corespondent to answer for a spouse's imaginary misconduct in a
hypothetical court of law. All this focussing of thought upon the
enforcement of a right is contrary to the spirit of marriage.

The measures used to enforce virginity till marriage are equally costly,
and like the anti-adultery measures, they penalize alike those who obey
and those who offend. If mating is postponed till long after puberty,
one of two methods must be pursued in order to forestall sex experience.
The surveillance method, as it is used in protecting the virginity of
women in Mediterranean countries, is not only costly in time and effort,
but also involves a sacrifice of the moral responsibility of the person
supervised. On the other hand, this method dispenses with the need for
building up inhibitions which will later interfere with the enjoyment of
sex. The alternative method, used especially in countries in which the
Teutonic stock has been drilled in the Puritan tradition, is the [p.200]
method of moral restraint. Certain negative attitudes toward sex are so
strongly instilled into the youth that they are inspired to protect
their own chastity. The effect of these attitudes is often injurious, as
psychiatry attests. The Hamilton research revealed that forty-six out of
one hundred married women had unsatisfactory sex lives in the sense that
they experienced no orgasm in coitus. Of these, twenty had been
diagnosed at one time or another as seriously psychoneurotic. Only one
of the fifty-four women whose sex lives were adequate had ever been
regarded as psychoneurotic. Attitudes which are useful in preserving
virginity are deleterious in marriage.

The mischievous effects of these virginity-protecting inhibitions are
especially marked in the case of the girl. They mislead her thinking
upon marriage, either by inculcating the notion that carnal things are
vile or by overemphasizing the supernatural interpretation of the
nuptial night, which magically transforms a sinful horror into a lawful
delight. In the first instance the development of a healthy aesthetics
of sex is handicapped; in the second instance the fantasies of the
schoolgirl theory of marriage are encouraged.

The harmful effect of the virginity standard upon the man is likely to
appear in the form of a dissociation of feelings of tenderness and
respect from feelings of sexual enjoyment, so that he becomes unable to
cherish any woman whom he enjoys. As a result of masturbation fantasies
on the one hand, and of "the association, in thought or deed or both, of
sexual practices with prostitutes" a "moral degradation of the sexual
object" takes place.

  [p.201] . . . when later in marriage the young man endeavors to unite
  esteem and tenderness with sexual passion, he may find that the
  dissociation between these elements of love has grown too wide and
  fundamental to be overcome, so that one or other of these requisites
  of a complete and happy married life has necessarily to be sacrificed.
  As a result of this a man may marry a woman whom he is prepared indeed
  to cherish, honor and esteem, but toward whom (for this very reason)
  he feels himself but little attracted in a purely sexual sense; in
  which case he will often be tempted after a while to seek a more
  complete degree of sexual satisfaction elsewhere. Or else, should the
  directly sexual trends prevail, he may select a partner who is
  inferior to him in some important intellectual, moral or social
  respect, thus paving the way for a married life in which many of his
  more sublimated tendencies, desires and aspirations are doomed to
  suffer permanent lack of gratification.[19]

The enforcement of the monopoly ideal with respect to attempts at
love-tenure marriages is accomplished largely by strict divorce laws and
penalties imposed for desertion. Desertion and divorce are the
equivalent means by which those unions are terminated wherein love has
lapsed. Spectacular instances of unhappiness in marriage, life tragedies
in which the bond of marriage has become a spirit-breaking fetter, have
been exposed in fiction and in propaganda. It was here that the attack
on sex monopoly was first opened in modern times, and it is here that
the attack has been most successful. Divorce and remarriage have
achieved a degree of social recognition [p.202] not yet accorded to
adultery, polygamy, or unchastity before marriage.

And after this price is paid for the attitudes that are expected to
enforce sex monopoly, it will often happen that enforcement is lax and
desultory. Truly, "the flesh is weak"; impulses break through the
restraints which it is intended to impose upon them; the pleasure
principle triumphs over the reality principle and attains a momentary
equilibrium at the sacrifice of future content. Phrase the thing as you
will in the language of all the schools from Aristotle and Augustine to
Freud and Watson, and the fact remains that these prohibitions do not
successfully prohibit. Despite the price paid for sex monopoly, we have
still to reckon with sex liberty.

If a fair hearing be given to the offender against the code, it will
sometimes transpire that conformity requires sacrifice. Even after
marriage sex cravings may remain unfulfilled and thus haunt and disturb
the mind. Sometimes this is only a transitory condition, as when
separation or illness imposes upon one partner a temporary period of
continence. Sometimes it is permanent, as when the husband and wife
differ greatly in sexual vigor. Frigidity in women, and in men the
dissociation of respect from enjoyment of sex, may ruin the whole sexual
side of a marriage. How often in human experience a strong sex
attraction toward some siren or charmer seems to impose itself unsought
upon a person whose intention is to conform to the monopolistic
standard, but who is compelled by this event to stage a struggle between
desire and will! Every one feels in some way the conflict between desire
for security on the one hand and the wish for novelty on the other. How
far these strains and tensions are the [p.203] necessary lot of mankind,
and how far they are the product of disjointed institutions and
environmental accidents, is quite uncertain. Many will be found to
assert that man is by nature polygamous, and monogamous marriage a
restraint upon his natural disposition. But this is pure speculation,
which has never been controlled by scientific investigation. In fact, it
is doubtful whether psychology is at present equipped to explore such a
question as this.

The pressure of unfulfilled cravings in the case of the virgin is
increased by an important element of curiosity, To remain chaste is to
remain ignorant. Moreover, the courtship institutions which place upon
the individual the full responsibility for winning his or her own mate
penalize the person who cannot flirt. But flirtation in a land where
youth has freedom of automobile transportation quickly gets out of hand.
The petting party is intended to play with tumescence but stop short of
coitus; actually it often goes beyond its self-drawn barrier. Our
confused institutions set for young people a difficult course to steer
between the Scylla of coldness and the Charybdis of unchastity.

It then, yielding to these pressures, recourse is had to sex liberty --
adulterous liaisons to meet transitory stresses, polygamous
relationships to relieve permanent tensions, experimental relationships
to satisfy the young, and an easy transition from one spouse to another
to break the marriage fetter -- how well or ill can these forms of sex
liberty be reconciled with satisfactory domestic life?

The effect of adultery upon domestic life depends principally upon the
meaning that husband and wife attach to [p.204] adulterous acts as
symbols of disloyalty. If society has taught them that adultery is the
supreme disloyalty, and they have constructed no other view for
themselves, then the destructive effect of sex liberty upon their family
life will be great and inevitable. The level of domestic interaction
will be automatically lowered as paramount loyalty vanishes. More than
that, it is likely to be taken for granted that adultery destroys
marriage and leaves the injured party no choice but separation and
divorce. This tragic attitude is due to the interpretation given to
adultery, not to the intrinsic qualities of the adulterous act. The
divorce for which "infidelity" furnishes ground is really due not to
misconduct alone but also to a socially induced sensitiveness. Thus a
double disaster follows from adultery when it is interpreted in the
light of the sex-monopoly ideal. The level of domestic behavior is
lowered and the duration of the marriage is threatened. The two basic
values of marriage are thus sacrificed.

If marriage makes the extreme adjustment to this pressure towards sex
liberty it changes from a monogamous to a polygamous basis. The effect
of this change upon family life is not merely a reflection of social
conventions, as these have determined the symbolic meanings of acts. It
is also a definite change in the structure of the family. And this
change in structure involves a tendency toward a lower level of domestic
interaction.

The polygamous family, analyzed in terms of domestic theory, is
comparable to a monogamous family which has come to include adult
children. In both cases there is an induction of additional members into
an already existing family. With the children the induction is gradual;
with additional wives or husbands it is more sud[p.205]den. The children
are only secondary members; the wives and husbands are primary. In both
cases the larger number of complete personalities engaged in the
domestic relationship renders the system of loyalties more complex and
tends to confusion. But when the additional members are wives and
husbands rather than sons or daughters, there is likely to be more
jealousy and less benevolent interaction developed between them. For the
children have had occasion to develop affection for each other, whereas
the natural rivalries of husbands and wives are not so screened.

Moreover there is no place in the polygamous system [or paramount
loyalty. Paramount loyalty to one spouse generates an equivalent
counteracting jealousy in the other. With children it is otherwise. They
are not forced into jealousy by the paramount loyalty of father and
mother to each other, because this inter-parental loyalty takes the form
of benevolence to the child. For the attitude of husband and wife to
their child can reflect the idea of joint possession, of cooperative
cherishing. But the attitude toward an additional spouse is not likely
to be colored by such an idea.

Finally, if the presence of adult children in the family should happen
to bring about some baneful confusion of loyalties, this confusion will
tend to dissolve away in time as the children set up their own families.
But the confusion between rival wives or husbands does not terminate
itself; rather it goes on increasing in intensity unless dulled by
habit. Therefore benevolent interaction in the polygamous family tends
to sink to a low level.

Some polygamous situations are better described by comparing them to
membership in two distinct families. [p.206] A man has one family in
Philadelphia and another in Memphis. His position is comparable to that
of a husband or wife who feels too strong a loyalty to the parental
household. There is a confusion of loyalties and hence a lowered level
of domestic interaction.

The lowered level of benevolent interaction is the penalty paid for
sacrificing the sex-monopoly ideal. There is no sacrifice of duration.

When duration as well as domestic interaction is sacrificed, the result
is comparable to a love-tenure marriage. If because of an adulterous
episode, or in resentment at a polygamous situation, a marriage is
broken up, the divorcees will say of their broken home that rivalry and
lapsing of true love had made it impossible to continue together.
Retrospectively at least, they will think that marriage may properly
last only so long as love endures. This notion appears among us not only
as a retrospective rationalization of domestic disaster but also as a
project for a new norm of conduct in marriage. The wedding vow is to be
changed to read, "As long as ye both shall _love_"; marriage in general
is to be placed on a love-tenure basis. What, in terms of domestic
theory, is the consequence of this type of sex liberty?

Just as polygamy sacrifices benevolent interaction but retains
permanence, so love-tenure marriage purports to sacrifice permanence in
the interest of benevolent interaction. Rather than tolerate a
unilateral level of domestic behavior (with all active affection on one
side), or a nondomestic level of behavior (from which all evidences of
affection are absent), it is proposed that the marriage should be
terminated, and whatever habit systems or memories it may have
accumulated relinquished.

[p.207] This innovation is the most attractive of all the projected
modifications of the marriage ideal, because it attacks one of the
marriage values in the name of the other. It seems to require of
marriage everything or nothing: either the full romantic system of
organization, or divorce.

The danger underlying this sex-liberty ideal is that it may misconceive
the true nature of domestic interaction and fall into the trap of using
the word love in its word-magic sense. Although those who adhere to this
ideal of sex liberty pretend to enormous sophistication, they are only a
step removed from the most naive schoolgirl theorist. They conjure up
and make use of a conception of love which is not adequate for the
purposes of marriage. Love is regarded as a feeling which comes upon
one, an event which occurs independently of willful action, a state
which one must passively accept if it appears, and as passively regret
if it departs. Concerning this kind of love there is no sense in
promising anything, for the will is not operative in its business. One
cannot promise, but only prophesy. One cannot commit oneself to a future
line of conduct, but only testify to a present condition. A conception
of love from which the element of will-commitment is so conspicuously
absent is a useless anomaly in marriage.

The weakness of the love-tenure marriage ideal is therefore not alone
that it requires a sacrifice of permanence, but also that it may imply a
misconception of the nature of domestic interaction, so that permanence
is sacrificed not to a true marriage value, but to a phantom value which
belongs rather to courtships and love affairs.

"Companionate marriage" has become a catchword, [p.208] spoiled by too
much misuse. When M. M. Knight coined the expression, it meant a
marriage which was intended to be childless, at least for a time. When
Judge Lindsay took it up, he added two more points to the program: more
adequate instruction on sex aesthetics and birth control, and more
lenient divorce laws for childless couples, allowing separation by
mutual consent without alimony. At the present time the words are coming
to betoken almost any independence of conventional standards in
marriage, and a general change in emphasis: less emphasis on duration,
more on love; less on duty to society, more on personal satisfaction.
The observations which apply to the ideal of love-tenure marriage apply
with equal force to much of the tangle of thinking which makes use of
the term "companionate marriage."" Characteristic of this type of
thinking is the subtle transition from the most naive concept of love to
the most sophisticated concept of convention. Equally characteristic is
a tendency to discount duration value in marriage.

The experimental type of sex liberty does not directly affect either of
the marriage values, for if it takes place at all, it is over before
marriage begins. It must be judged, therefore, by its effect in
qualifying or disqualifying persons for successful marriage, and not by
its direct bearing on the success of the family.

Just as in the case of adultery, so also as regards virginity, the taboo
which actually exists in Occidental society must be reckoned with, for
it penalizes the marriages of those who have had premarital sex
experience by causing the person who does not bring virginity to the
marriage bed to be regarded as damaged goods. The symbolic significance
which conventions assign to vir[p.209]ginity must be taken into account
by the present generation of young people as a part of the environment
to which they must adjust themselves. But they will wish to cast up for
themselves the advantages and disadvantages of premarital chastity
regardless of the ruling of convention. For they regard themselves as
critics rather than servants of the customs that environ them.

The principal risks which attend experimental sex experience before
marriage are the well-known risks of parenthood and disease. The rivalry
risk does not enter at all. And as regards the aesthetic considerations,
it is debatable whether there is more to be gained by attaining a
thorough first-hand knowledge of sex before marriage so that marital sex
relations can be well carried on from the beginning, or by foregoing
initiation into sex until it can be enjoyed as part of a total marriage
experience,

The parenthood risk is unevenly distributed between the man and the
woman. This is one of the reasons for the double standard of premarital
morality against which women in recent years have so successfully
campaigned. The unmarried mother who has kept her child has lost some of
her qualifications for wifehood, and the one who has given up her child
may have suffered a shock which will affect her success as a mother
after marriage. The unmarried father is in a similar dilemma. The more
he feels his responsibility for his illegitimate offspring, the more
confused his loyalty will be at the very time when his bride will expect
it to be most direct and undivided. The more completely he renounces his
responsibility as a parent, the more clearly he reveals [p.210] success.
An illegitimate child before marriage is a handicap in the attaining of
marital success.

Those cases in which the parents marry after the birth of an
illegitimate child are of course not different, from the standpoint of
domestic theory, from any other permanent sex union which is for a time
unlicensed by society. In these cases the natural family is fully
established before it receives its legal recognition.

The popularization of contraceptives has diminished the parenthood risk,
even though available devices are not one hundred per cent certain, and
the marketing of them is carried on among young people on a bootleg
basis. The complete elimination of the parenthood risk must await the
better development of contraceptive technique, and the acceptance of a
new standard of medical law (already foreshadowed in German legislation)
which will permit a woman to have a legal right to decide whether she
will bear a child or not.

What is true of the parenthood risk is equally true of the disease risk.
And here also adequate precautions can offer some protection, but
protection is not complete.

The value of first-hand knowledge of sex to one who undertakes marriage
is twofold. In the first place it can prevent some bungling and
disappointment. Hamilton found that the nonvirgin husbands were more
likely than the virgins to be sexually satisfactory to their wives. Not
always. A man's experience with a prostitute may teach him to enjoy
voluptuousness but does not necessarily teach him to make sex enjoyable
to a wife. And if amateurish mistakes are to result in permanent sexual
anaesthesia, it is not clear that such mistakes are [p.211] less likely
to occur in a premarital experiment than in a nuptial initiation.

However, if initiation is to be postponed till marriage, it is necessary
that adequate instruction be available to young people. Otherwise the
marriages of virgins are penalized. Books such as those by Cooper or
Stopes should be available on the open market. If there is to be
chastity till marriage, both partners should realize that they must
study and understand the sex act in order fully to enjoy it.

There is danger that too much emphasis upon the need for marriage before
coitus may confuse the thought of young people upon the character of
marriage, and hence unfit them to carry on successful family life. Here
are two very different things: to satisfy sex curiosity, and to commit
one's will to a paramount loyalty through life. If these two things are
so closely linked that the one is not to be had without the other, many
will marry without having either the intention or the equipment to make
their marriage a success. When sex experiment is cloaked by a wedding
there results a kind of mock- marriage which, to paraphrase Groves, is
no more than a legalized temporary sex attraction, which, unable to
progress into marriage comradeship, ends in anticlimax.[20]

In terms of domestic theory, a revision of standards of virginity is
most dangerous to domestic values if the marriage license is used to
authorize initiation into sex, when the marriage itself does not
constitute a longterm life plan for the bride and bridegroom. If sex
gratification is sought before there is an engagement in [p.212]
permanent marriage, the virginity ideal is really surrendered, even
though the divorce and remarriage device may conceal the surrender.
Since duration is one of the two fundamental values of family life, it
is important that the distinction between permanent marriages and
transitory love affairs be not obscured. Rather than confuse all
thinking on marriage and family life by forgetting this duration value,
it is preferable (from the standpoint of domestic theory) that a margin
should be left for unregistered and unlicensed play of sex.

It cannot escape the attention of the thoughtful reader of these pages
that no intrinsic excellence appears to attach to sex liberty _per se_.
Nor is sex monopoly intrinsically evil.

Where baneful effects are associated with sex monopoly, these are the
result of enforcement measures, taboos, educational devices. Not sex
monopoly but the means which are used to insure sex monopoly have
brought criticism upon the monopolistic ideal.

The evidence of ethnology attests that the taboos, the stimulated
jealousies, the restrictive laws, the life-warping inhibitions which are
set up among us to discipline sex life are not to be regarded as the
necessary products of universally prevalent human attitudes. Societies
differ between extreme poles as to the significance they attach to
infringements of sex monopoly, and as to the value they attach to
virginity. According to the customs of many peoples, virginity is a
blemish in bride or groom, and no one is expected to marry without
having had previous sex intercourse.[21] Adultery is not everywhere
regarded as a serious offense against the family. Malin[p.213]owski
found that among the Trobriand Islanders adultery was not considered
important, but certain obscene words, if used by a husband to his wife,
were taken as symbols of supreme disloyalty. In one instance the use of
these words resulted in a suicide. That men can share their wives
without feeling injured thereby is evidenced wherever the institution of
hospitality prostitution exists. That women can share their husbands
without jealousy is illustrated by the case of the Kikuyu wife who
reproached her mate: "Why do I have to do all the work; why do you not
buy another wife?" Of course where the institution of polygamy prevails
it is definitely evil and anti-social for one wife to monopolize the
husband.

It is Occidental society, then, and not human nature, which insists on
monopoly and virginity and leaves no freedom for choice. Somehow we must
continue to live at peace with this colossal community. At what price
can we break away from its sex standards?

Can individuals, either alone or in their small Bohemian communities,
defy social rules in these matters? Can they re-define for themselves
the meanings of sex acts so that they gain freedom from the enforcement
measures which society imposes?

The attempt is being made. There are people who say that so far as they
are concerned, virginity does not matter, and there are others who
declare that they do not demand a monopoly of husband or wife, nor
expect themselves to be monopolized. Recent literature on the family
abounds in the records of deliberate and mutually permitted violations
of the sex-monopoly code. Judge Lindsay knew a young couple who were
about to separate in the conventional way after the husband's [p.214]
one adulterous connection. But instead of divorce, they decided to
surrender mutually their monopolistic claims upon each other. And after
that they got along famously. Hamilton records a number of these
adultery-toleration compacts. His evidence suggests that the men in the
case tolerate their wives' adulteries very well, but the women find it
more difficult to suppress feelings of jealousy.

Another case is that of a young man, a punctiliously honest person,
intelligent and well educated, who casually announced one evening some
time in the fourth year of his marriage that he was by nature polygamous
and would not consider himself bound to refrain from intercourse With
other women. He had no objection to any similar course his wife might
take with other men. He proposed that neither of them should interpret
such conduct as disloyal. And after he had made this declaration,
nothing whatsoever was done about it. He had at the time no particular
woman in mind, and he has had no love affair since. Following this
declaration there ensued the same orderly married existence that had
preceded it. The gesture was an act of liberation whereby the husband
sought to re-define the meaning of sex loyalty in his family life.

These attempts to avoid the use of social conventions in dealing with
sex problems require for their success a certain careful conspiracy
against publicity. If those who attempt them cannot maintain their
privacy, they will find it difficult to escape from the pressure of the
judgment of their neighbors.

But if they are successful in mapping their own course, in what
direction are they to go? None of the four [p.215] types of sex liberty
has any intrinsic superiority to the monopolistic state. Neither
promiscuity nor divorce is an end worth seeking for itself.

Though divorce may, under certain circumstances, be a lesser of two
evils, it cannot be other than an evil in marriage. It is both a symptom
and a disease. In terms of hedonism and individualistic ethics, divorce
is a symptom. It indicates that the marriage has not been pleasing and
has not proved worth while to the individual. In terms of domestic
theory, divorce is an absolute evil in that it destroys duration value,
and duration value is one of the two essential marriage values. So also
with adultery and polygamy. They may indeed relieve some strain, but
their tendency is necessarily to degrade the level of domestic
interaction in the family, even if the tendency does not decisively
determine the event. Sex liberty does not pretend to contribute anything
of positive value to the natural family. Sex monopoly, rather, is the
norm of family life.

But at the some time it is dangerous to permit this norm to assume the
status of a mandate by the community.

Exclusiveness in sex is an ideal toward which natural marriage may
spontaneously and rightly strive, but it is not properly a standard to
be imposed upon married people, willy-nilly, from without.

The disastrous results of the sex-monopoly ideal occur when the ideal is
attached to the family as an institution; they do not occur when tho
ideal is attached to the natural family.

Is it not reasonable that people should be left free to decide for
themselves to what extent they will regard [p.216] extra-marital sex
relations as disloyal? If, taking circumstances into account, they
decide to maintain sex life as an exclusive secret between them, this
decision could then be an expression of the implicit artistic principles
of family life rather than a mere surrender to external pressure.

When circumstances, either temporary or permanent, bring it about that
the maintenance of sex monopoly imposes a real sacrifice upon one or the
other partner, husband and wife might well be free to agree whether the
sacrifice imposed does not outweigh the advantage to be derived from
monopoly.

And the mere act of adultery need not be construed as final evidence of
a definitive lapse of paramount loyalty toward husband or wife. Such
constructions are arbitrary fictions which derive their appearance of
validity from social judgments rather than from the actual experience.

These principles clear up a seeming inconsistency which pervades much of
the liberal writing on marriage. Again and again propagandists of
marriage reform have argued against the strictness of the marriage
fetter, only to conclude that if marriages were more free they would
come in the end to observe more completely monopolistic standards of
behavior. Thus they seem at once to affirm the value of the sex-monopoly
ideal and to deny it. The truth is that the ideal is good as a plan of
life, but bad as an enforced element of the marriage institution.

Is it possible to avoid the strain which the sex-monopoly ideal places
upon marriage, without giving up the advantages which this ideal
confers? If such an end is to be attained, it is necessary, first of
all, to limit the [p.217] emphasis on sexuality in family life. This is
harsh doctrine in the ears of the younger generation who have carried
the reaction against Puritanism so far that they seem now to foster
sexuality even at the expense of family life, and to regard marriage as
if its whole meaning were exhausted in the one item, sex. The mixture of
fad and sanity that characterizes any extreme reaction is present in
this revolution in marriage ideals.

Some of the revolutionary changes seem fated to endure. The movement to
develop the aesthetic side of sex is sound. The dropping away of the
extraneous institutional functions of the family (economic, religious,
political) carries with it as a consequence a relatively greater
emphasis on sex. It would be vain to try to sweep back the tide, to
restore to the family its lost functions, or conceal the facts of sex
again in Puritanical obscurantism.

Because of these changes, it now remains to give to the natural family,
already stripped bare of its institutional trappings, a clearer
consciousness of its meaning and purpose. These must include sex, but
sex must not have too destructive a primacy. The erotic side of marriage
has decisive importance, but only as a part of a more general scheme.
The concept of domestic interaction and duration as the primary function
of the family includes sex play, and reaches beyond it. Sex monopoly is
a part only, not the whole, of sex life in marriage. And sex life in
marriage is itself a mere part, and not a completed whole. If we start
with a definite notion of the functions of the natural family, the true
place of the sex-monopoly ideal in the marriage scheme can be deduced
therefrom.

[p.218] A decision to conform completely to the sex-monopoly ideal,
involving the renunciation of plurality of sex connections whether
simultaneous or consecutive, is properly a decision to be made freely,
for aesthetic reasons, in order to protect or enhance the two basic
marriage values: domestic interaction and duration. This line of conduct
need not be imposed by the community; it should be the free choice of
those who accept the implicit principles of marriage.

[p.219]

WE cannot live by the book. However coherent and adequate our standards
may be, it remains to apply them to particular cases. This is something
that each individual must do for himself. He must take facts which are
infinitely diverse and fashion them toward ideals which are utterly
unattainable. And just because this is the consummatory problem of
marriage -- as indeed of all life -- it is a problem which the
principles of marriage cannot solve, but only set up for solution. It is
the problem of workmanship, of creation, of art without the capital A.
In this broadest sense the artistry of marriage is here brought under
review.

In the artistry of marriage there is a necessary fusion of two kinds of
principles. On the one hand there is the specific ideal of permanence
and loyalty which is intrinsic to marriage; on the other hand there is
the more general ideal of beauty, proportion, harmony of part and whole,
which is characteristic of art, and the ideal of adequate adaptation of
means to end, which is the distinguishing mark of technology.

So long as we were exploring the principles of marriage it was necessary
to segregate the values peculiar to the family from the values which are
common to all fields of human interest. Therefore actions were
classified according to the conscious motive in which they originated,
[p.220] ignoring for the purposes of inquiry the actual effects which
the actions may have had. A benevolently motivated act was classed as a
domestic act, whether or not it actually benefited the person to whom it
was directed.

For instance, there is the case of the woman who seeks to benefit her
husband by chiding him for some fault. If her motive is sincere, her
conduct conforms to the standards intrinsic to marriage. But the
principles of technology and art remain to be satisfied. It may be that
her method is ill-devised for securing the end she has in view. Her
manner of chiding may intensify the fault instead of removing it. Or the
end itself may be ill-chosen. She may be acting in the sincere
conviction that tobacco is the Devil's weed, which brings damnation to
the soul and disease to the body. But the man may be actually better off
with his tobacco, so that the habit she is campaigning against is not
really a fault at all.

A man may get on better with a wife who is wise and selfish than with a
woman who is a devoted fool. Though his life be not so rich in domestic
values, it may be happier. For happiness and ease are more directly the
products of art and technology than of domestic interaction.

What then is the province of art in marriage? Does it complement or
supplant the basic marriage values of permanence and loyalty? Are there
certain special canons of art applicable to marriage as there are rules
which apply to painting and sculpture? These questions are raised in a
practical spirit. There is no need to pose the general philosophical
question of the nature of art. [p.221] Neither is there any great value
in merely taking over terms from certain of the fine arts and applying
them to marriage. To be sure, there has been of late much superficial
translating into the language of aesthetics. The advertisements announce
the discovery of "subtle harmonies" in everything from automobiles to
cold creams, and it is not uncommon to read of "delicate rhythms" in
products as diverse as mustard and silk. An analysis of art in marriage
must go deeper than the linguistic transmutations of this recent fad.
There must be a comprehensive survey of marriage as an aesthetic
situation.

At the root of this aesthetic situation lies the question: Who is the
artist in marriage, and what the medium of his art?

  All this of Pot and Potter -- Tell me then
  Who is the Potter, pray, and who the Pot?

Of some art products a single individual is the creator; others arise
from an organized mutual activity. Thus, according to Meier-Graeffe, the
highest art of the Middle Ages was coöperative -- mosaic, stained glass
windows, architecture -- whereas the highest art of the Renaissance was
individual -- the picture in a frame. To which of these classes does
marriage belong?

The temptation is to answer at once that marriage is a duet rather than
a solo, and there is some truth in the answer. There is a sense in which
marriage can be regarded as a Pot made by two Potters. But actually the
artistic relationship of husband and wife is far more complex. Some of
their activity is a coöperative effort to secure an effect extraneous to
both. They pose [p.222] together for the benefit of the neighbors; they
conspire together to create some impression of themselves in their
community. They labor together for economic success; they plan together
for their children. With respect to this kind of activity they can be
compared to the ballet dancers on the stage, whose art is cooperative.
But with respect to most of their actions they are not working together
to impress some third party. They are working rather upon each other.
They are treating each other at once as the medium of their artistic
expression and the spectators of their artistic success.

This extraordinary relationship is comparable in some ways to the
situation of pedagogy, wherein the student is the medium in which the
teacher works -- the teacher the Potter and the student the Pot. One
marriage partner works upon the personality of the other, modifying it
either by accident or according to plan. We may speak of this as the
_pedagogics_ of marriage. An illustration is of course the campaign
against the other person's bad habit, or the effort to remove some
prejudice from the other's mind.

Beyond this the situation is comparable to that of the theater. Each
person maintains himself as a spectacle for the others to admire or
appreciate. The wife endeavors to "keep up" after marriage, in order
that she may retain her husband's affection. All this posing with a view
to increase the respect one receives in his family belongs to a special
class of endeavor. It may be called the _histrionics_ of marriage.

Both the pedagogies and histrionics of marriage can be the vehicle of
benevolent activity. Moreover they are the means by which the individual
operates upon [p.223] the organization of the family and directs the
flow of domestic life.

It is of the first importance that the technique of married living is so
much a matter of individual initiative. For if a perfect accord of
husband and wife in harmonious purpose to coöperate were a precondition
of the use of art and technique in the family, it would appear that the
possibility of artistry is present only when the need for it has passed.
It is important to understand that even though one spouse refuses to do
his part or fails to grasp the character of the problem confronting him,
the other can none the less carry on alone the practice of the art of
marriage. In every family that functions on the unilateral level, and in
many pseudo-patriarchal families, the significant artistry all comes
from one person, the other responding automatically to the situations
that unfold.

The ancient legend comes to mind of Shun of Yu, who became Emperor of
China because he had proved himself able, single-handed, to bring
harmony to a discordant family. When the first of the Emperors grew old,
he looked about for some one to succeed him. The courtiers recommended

  . . . an unmarried man among the lower people called Shun. . . . His
  father was obstinately unprincipled. His stepmother was insincere, his
  half-brother Hsiang was arrogant. He has been able, however, by filial
  piety, to live in harmony with them and to lend them gradually to
  self-government, so that they no longer proceed to great wickedness.

Upon hearing this report the Emperor determined to test Shun in marriage
by giving him his daughters as wives. [p.224] And when Shun successfully
passed this test he was made Emperor. It is no accident that the
Chinese, whose institutions emphasize so much the value of the kinship
group, should retain this anecdote at the beginning of the oldest of
their classics. The story was already a thousand years old when
Confucius read it and retained it in the Book of Shu. The point and
purpose of it is clear: that each member of the family can take it upon
himself to bring excellence to domestic life.

While recognizing the individual person as the "artist" of marriage, it
is still necessary to take into account the fact that the consequences
of his art appear in an interplay of himself with one other person only.
The marriage artisan resembles more nearly the writer of a letter than
the composer of an essay. The full range of creation and effect is
reached without going beyond that "field of force" which the tension of
two wills maintains.

Regardless of the level of domestic interaction which prevails in the
family, there are always, then, two independent wills to be reckoned
with. When these two wills direct themselves toward each other, so that
each person desires the advantage of the other, there is inevitable
tension between them. For it is impossible that there should be
automatic agreement upon all the things which are presumed to be of
advantage to one or the other. Of this universal fact of will tension in
the family, the standard expression is the domestic dispute or episode
of conflict.

The sociologists who are studying the pathology of family life have made
elaborate classifications of tensions. Some are due to an absence of sex
response, others to an absence of respect, others to poverty. Sometimes
[p.225] one member of the family is ashamed of the other; he feels that
his own social standing is compromised by the incompetence or the
reputation of his marriage partner. From the standpoint of domestic
theory these tensions belong to two classes. To the first class belong
normal tensions, consistent with paramount loyalty; to the second belong
the pathological tensions which presage the disruption or degradation of
the family. And the test for determining the character of a domestic
tension is this: does it arise from a misunderstanding of symbols, a
lack of agreement upon some matter of opinion? Or does it spring from
insufficient loyalty, from an unwillingness of one person to make
sacrifices for the other?

The greater the difference in the social background of husband and wife,
the more intense will be the normal tensions. There is the story for
instance of the American girl who married an Hungarian army officer. It
never occurred to this girl that her husband placed a high symbolic
value upon being met at the door when he came home. She took no
particular pains to be at home when he came in, and in this he was
bitterly disappointed. The cure for tensions of this kind is a mutual
explanation, a quarrel, or an educational campaign. It is a matter of
pedagogics.

The lower the level of domestic interaction, the greater is the
likelihood of pathological tensions. An illustration is the case of a
girl who married a wealthy man but would not face poverty with him when
his fortune melted away, or the man who complains with rancor that he
has lost valuable opportunities because of his marriage. In these cases
of insufficient loyalty neither quarrels nor explanations are of much
avail. The only thing that [p.226] counts is some increase in the value
which one person has for the other -- in other words, it is a matter of
histrionics.

Within the field of tension which marriage maintains, the critical event
is the personal conflict. The conflict episode is second only to coitus
as the test of artistry in marriage. Just as coitus brings the two
persons nearest to each other, so the quarrel marks the point where they
are farthest apart. Just as coitus dissolves the sense of separateness
and individuality so the quarrel hardens and crystallizes it. Coitus is
the perigee of the orbit of two individuals, and the quarrel the apogee.
In coitus the fact that there are two distinct persons and wills is
least significant; in the quarrel it is most significant.

This view of the personal conflict as an essential and normal
characteristic of marriage runs counter to some of the homiletics of
matrimony, and the reason for this is clear. For the quarrel is likely
to be more conspicuous, viewed from outside, than any other moment of
married life. The failure of artistry in coitus gets no publicity; even
in the divorce court proceedings it is covered by circumlocutions such
as "incompatibility." But an artistic failure in managing disputes gives
the whole neighborhood a copious subject for discussion. Therefore when
family life is seen from the outside it will appear that the least
quarrelsome pair is the pair which is most nearly perfect in its
domestic life. But when the marriage is viewed as an independent system,
disregarding its contacts with the public, the fallacy of this judgment
is clear. Just as some heavenly bodies have narrow orbits, approaching
very near their focus at perigee, and being immeasurably far from it at
apogee, [p.227] so in some unions there is oscillation between extremes
of distance and proximity, whereas in others there is an evenness which
permits neither great hostility nor great intimacy. Clearly we cannot
calculate the orbit of a marriage as if its only measure were the
apogee; we must reckon in the perigee as well.

The belief that the object of married life is to avoid conflicts, and
the failure to accept them as normal elements of marriage. have served
in the past to blind us to the artistic principles involved. Just as
respect for the privacy of coitus has caused its artistic importance to
be ignored, so derision over publicity attending quarrels has led to a
neglect of the artistry of quarreling. The first principle of this
artistry is indeed that there should be no publicity. The quarrel should
be as sacred a secret of the family as coitus is wont to be.

Another canon of the art is that the quarrel should be adequate -- no
mere pin-pricking. It should accomplish a catharsis of the emotions. And
withal it should he kept under control. There should be no complete loss
of judgment and sense of proportion. These are two contradictory
requirements, for the more emotion enters the quarrel, the less room is
left for judgment and discipline.

And finally, the conflict must be brought to a conclusion. It does not
suffice merely to abandon an attitude of hostility and resume an
attitude of tenderness. The whole episode must be given an artistic
consummation. The dispute which ends when one person slams the door and
walks out, to return when the storm is blown over, is probably not ended
at all. Even if they kiss and go to bed they may be leaving their
quarrel half-done, like [p.228] a play which does not go beyond the
second act. When it is said that the quarrel must he brought to a
conclusion, this does not mean that the substance of the dispute must be
settled one way or the other, once and for all, but only that the
episode of the dispute must be so stage-managed that it will become, in
retrospect, a pleasant memory.

The art of the dispute requires for its success an adequate reserve of
loyalty. The supreme and accepted loyalty of each partner to the other
is the only background against which really successful contention can go
on. Ultimately in the course of the dispute there must come a moment
when values are transmuted, and when that which was the subject of the
contention moves to a different level of importance, or takes on a
different color. This moment in the quarrel corresponds to the orgasm of
coitus. So long as there is adequate loyalty to he played upon, this
moment can always be achieved.

To resolve a conflict episode in this way does not necessarily require
the submission of one will to another. Sometimes there is a real
enlightenment upon the subject of the dispute. The argument gets
somewhere. The perception of the new facts or relationships alters the
importance of the old ones. The husband demonstrates with figures that
the proposed purchase is really beyond their means, and this new fact
changes the wife's opinion. Or again, one person comes to see that he
has touched upon too tender a spot in the other's personality, and
having made this discovery he takes it thenceforth into account with the
same indulgence that he accords to any other quality or infirmity. If
the other mind is closed to the liberal point of view upon sex monopoly,
[p.229] or immutably prejudiced against having a dog in the house, this
is then to be accepted as a part of himself, like his fondness for
onions or his inability to remember names. A subtle campaign of
education can go on, but the fact revealed by the quarrel is not again
to be disregarded.

More generally useful than anything else in bringing conflicts through
their crises is the quality we describe as a sense of humor. This
quality is not so much a matter of quick-wittedness as an ability to
change the importance of things by regarding them from a new point of
view. One steps lightly from the attitude of a participant to the
attitude of a spectator, and presto, the thing that was vitally
important a moment before, engaging all one's concentrated powers,
becomes a joke. The quarrel that is played through till it ends in a
laugh is all ready to be stored away as a delicious memory.[22]

The art of personal contention can be regarded as a subtle exercise in
combining histrionics and pedagogics. One attempts to cause the other to
alter his attitude or character without cheapening the self in order to
obtain this effect. Mere scolding or nagging is bad quarreling because
it sacrifices histrionic values; it cheapens the scolder and may not
even then effect the desired change in the person who is scolded. So
also more sweetness and yielding, if there is no adequate subtlety or
firmness of character back of it, sacrifices the pedagogic effects for
the histrionic. Both of these extremes are bad marriage art.

[p.230] In the art of contention, in pedagogics and histrionics, as
indeed in all the phenomena of marriage-as-tension, the decisive fact is
the juxtaposition of two wills, two independent personalities. There is
another element of marriage art, whereof the decisive fact is rather a
flow of shared experiences. As we shift our attention from the activity
of the independent will to the content of shared experiences, we turn
from the study of the artist to the contemplation of the artifact.
Again, and with a new emphasis, we are called upon to distinguish
between the Potter and the Pot.

Some products of human effort, such as pictures, statues, or poems, we
are prone to judge as completed things, giving little attention to the
sequence of acts out of which they were created. Such things as banquets
or symphonies and such arts as dancing or navigation are valued
differently. With them we tend to note a continuous process rather than
a single completed thing. The painter unlocks his studio, admits the
critic, and declares that he has just finished the painting; what sense
would there be in the pianist admitting his audience to declare to them
that he had just finished playing the Moonlight Sonata? The art of
marriage in this respect resembles music rather than painting.

There is something in marriage of sequence and change that can be
compared to the melody of music, and there is also a depth, an intrinsic
value in each moment that can be compared to the harmony.

And here again the art of marriage must compromise.

Some peopie live for the future, always discounting the present moment
for the sake of an ambition to be realized. And others dwell
continuously in the past. [p.231] These are right in understanding life
as a sequence, but the melody of their existence lacks depth.

At the other extreme are those who, like the schoolgirl, make no offer
to compromise with the impermanence of things. They require of marriage
an unchanging bliss, a projection into time of the rapture with which
the prince and dream girl exchange vows. Their great moments are the
richer because of the borrowed robe of eternality with which they are
clothed. But such lives are not ordered to accord with the ways of
nature. The penalty is called disillusionment.

The need for compromise with impermanence is not a peculiar problem
present in the marriage art alone; it is a problem that arises whenever
the attempt is made to apply the principles of art to the immediate
business of living. Marriage has that kind of variability and
continuousness which all living things share. It is a continuousness
which includes part of the past in the present, an impermanence of
growth. It is simply because the marriage relationship is so immediate,
so close to life, that the flux and transition of life so relentlessly
attends it. As it is with love and marriage, so is it also with work and
fame, with beauty and pleasure, and with all the immediate objects of
human endeavor. As the wife looks back with regret upon her bridal
ruptures, so also the elderly business man returns to his class reunion
in a vain attempt to recapture, if only for a moment, the glow of his
college days. From the time of Heraclitus to the present there has been
a meditative exploring of compromises and ways of escape from this fated
way of life. And we are still left to make what terms we can with this
common human destiny.

[p.232] The only adequate compromise with transience is one which makes
use of transience itself as a medium in which to work. Marriage must
therefore accept the very change and sequence of things as its artistic
medium. It will follow from this postulate that marriages are never
completed, never achieved. They are only in process of achievement
Actions and events are to be valued not alone by the qualities they
impermanently display in the present but also by referring them to the
whole series of actions and events in which they stand. An embrace which
closes a pleasant evening of recreation, setting its seal of delight
upon a delightful episode, has a distinctive artistic significance, and
is set apart from the embrace which delightfully commemorates the
wedding anniversary. The pleasant sensations may be identical, but the
values are different because the two acts enter into different
sequences. The insouciant bliss of the honeymoon is to be rated not in
its own terms as a kind of absolute happiness to be enjoyed while it
lasts and regretted when it is gone, but rather as the starting point of
a sequence of shared experiences, to be built upon and elaborated with
infinite variety as the years pass.

This is the standpoint from which Walter Pater proposed to regard all
problems of conduct and opinion. It is a way of life which he has
excellently presented in ascribing it to Marius the Epicurean.

  Amid his eager grasping at the sensation, the consciousness, of the
  present, he had come to see that, after all, the main point of economy
  in the conduct of the present, was the question: How will it look to
  me, at what shall I value it, this day next year? -- that in any given
  day or month one's main con[p.233]cern was its impression for the
  memory. A strange trick memory sometimes played him; for, with no
  natural gradation, what was of last month, or of yesterday, of to-day
  even, would seem as far all, as entirely detached from him, as things
  of ten years ago. Detached from him, yet very real, there lay certain
  spaces of his life, in delicate perspective, under a favorable light;
  and, somehow, all the less fortunate detail had parted from them.

This contemplative Epicureanism requires to be elaborated before it is
adequate as a canon of the marriage art. For actions and events leave
their legacy to the future not alone in the form of memory images, but
also in the form of habits and knowledge. Therefore the events of
marriage, regarded as parts of a sequence, have a triple value in that
they contribute throuqh recurrence to habit, through experience to
enlightenment, and through their intrinsic beauty to a beautiful fabric
of memories.

Our current ways of thinking have made us familiar with the technique of
habit formation and the value of experience. Every wife speaks more or
less jestingly of training her husband to do this or that, and most
marriages recognize sooner or later that they give rise to a learning
process. That the artful treasuring of memories is also a part of the
technique of marriage is a fact in which we have been less thoroughly
schooled. It is a matter of curious import that the college girl keeps a
"memory book," pastes into it her dance programs and photographs of her
friends, and maintains as a cult the worship of sacred memories. But
with marriage this kind of preoccupation usually fades away, except for
the elementary practice of keeping anniversaries.

The melody and harmony of marriage, the length and [p.234] the depth of
its experiences, are thus woven together in habit, knowledge, and
memory. The marriage artifact is the flow and cumulation of shared
experience. If husband or wife or both stand forth as the Potter, this
sequence, indeed, is the Pot.

Nor is there anything mysterious or intangible in marriage thus
conceived. The artifact of marriage is as real as a nationality, which
also exists in a flow and cumulation of memories, habits, and
experiences. The process of nation-making is not unlike the art of
fashioning forth a family. Just as nationalities feed their spiritual
life upon dreams of the future and memories of the past -- the dream of
power perhaps, or the legends of ancient kings -- so the family
nourishes itself in youth upon its hopes and ambitions, or treasures in
middle age the shared reminiscences of happy adventures long past. Just
as nationalities develop their own languages, so families contrive
certain special and secret meanings which they give to things. In every
family there are some words which have a peculiar flavor because of some
memorable happening with which they are associated. Moreover, just as a
nationality dignifies its ways of doing things by setting them up
proudly as national customs, so the family can infuse into its very
chores a sense of ritual.

These developments are within limits subject to control, not only as
regards gross matters of habit but also in the finer things of memory
and meaning. There is room for delicate discriminations between that
which is to be remembered and that which is to be forgotten, and between
that which is to be shared outside the family and that which is to be
held as a family secret. One can always exercise a subtle control over
the record. Anec[p.235]dotes live only by the telling, and the version
that is told becomes eventually the truth.

If the artistic medium of family life is a flow of shared experiences,
there are certain external limitations with which the marriage artisan
must reckon. These are the limitations set by the instruments, the
tools. Where with one fashions a sequence of experiences.

These instruments for the creating of experiences are of three kinds.
First of all the body, with its capacities and its hazards. Then the
whole contribution which the social environment affords: cultural
heritage; social status; the whole fabric of conventions, rules, and
symbols which is the language of conduct no less than the language of
words. Finally there are the hard material things, with food and warmth
at one end of the scale and diamond bracelets at the other. In the
actual distribution of energy that imposes itself upon us, varying
proportions of effort can be invested in these three instruments of
marriage. And all extremes are likely to be bad art.

Of these three hard facts, the body has of course the greatest ultimate
importance. The risk of death hangs over every family, threatening to
penalize the survivor for the very success of his marriage by making the
loss more painful to endure. There is also the risk of loss of health,
which may revolutionize a whole system of family relationships. Aside
from these possibilities of disaster, many people are tempted to spend
much thought in calculating their own capacities and meditating upon
their own level of ability as compared with the abilities of others. A
man should take reasonable care of his health without going to the
extreme of hypochondria. [p.236] He should have a just enough
appreciation of his capacities so that his endeavors may be proportioned
to his powers, without going to the psychopathic extreme of a chronic
feeling of inferiority or grandeur. The ideal of art requires moderation
and proportion in these things.

The same artistic canons apply to the use of the social environment
envisaged as an instrument for creating experience.

Of course our ways of thinking are so largely determined by our social
surroundings and the content of our thought so deeply imbedded in the
psychic matrix of culture that no experience comes into existence
without bearing a whole array of socially given meanings. The meanings
that apply to a shared experience are partly subject to voluntary
control, and partly beyond control, To some extent we can choose the
meaning we will give to an act. For instance, people who are camping on
a lonely lake shore have gone bathing without bathing suits. Is this
beautiful, or indecent? If they automatically apply to their act the
interpretation it would be given by a circle of acquaintances in their
home town, they will accept the indecent meaning as the true
significance of their act. If they appeal to the traditions of poetry or
Greek mythology, they will appreciate its beauty and lift its meaning
above the taint of indecency.

People who feel the pressure of their community as a fetter can escape
from it by appealing to a wider circle. Thus they grasp at culture, at
liberal education, because it trees them from the narrow perspectives of
their immediate environment. They reject the standards of Gopher Prairie
and seek admission to a world-wide intellectual community. In this way
they come to control [p.237] their social environment by increasing the
range of socially given meanings they can apply to particular acts.

Another kind of preoccupation with the social environment concerns
itself with the relation of the self to the community. One strives
diligently to conform to the standards of some community in order that
he may win its approval. This is the quest for fame, for higher social
status. The community in which one strives for higher status may be
anything from the neighborhood group to the republic of letters.
Achievement may be registered by rewards as various as the
light-heavyweight boxing: championship or an invitation to Mrs. Ransom's
tea. One who wins the approval of an outside circle is often rewarded by
receiving additional esteem in his home; conversely one who has made a
conspicuous failure in the quest for social status may find that his
standing in his family has suffered thereby. Preoccupation with status
in the social environment is thus an element of the histrionics of
marriage.

Both in seeking to escape from the limitations of social environment and
in striving to conform to its demands, there is need for compromise. The
student type, overmuch preoccupied with self-education, loses touch with
humanity. His life is in danger of becoming thin while he is trying to
broaden it. And the slave of inordinate ambition sacrifices the present
to the future, giving himself over to be the prey of external
circumstances which may lie beyond his power.

The use of the social environment as an instrument at experience-making
is likely to be unconscious; social judgments are so much taken for
granted that we are unaware of their character as social judgments, and
social [p.238] approval as an object of endeavor receives a similar
uncritical acceptance. As to material things, we are more fully
conscious of the character of our relationship to them. We perceive at
once their necessity, and the margin of choice that is left us in
deciding how much attention we are to give to them. In our civilization
the issue is very plain, because material things are all commuted to a
common denominator of money, and thus we have only to ask ourselves how
far the pursuit of wealth is to absorb our energies.

In making terms with material conditions the artistry of marriage faces
some of its most fateful decisions. If too much attention is given to
money-getting, the essential personal side of the family may be starved.
In the old rural household personal contacts and interests in the family
would take care of themselves; there was plenty of living and working
together. But in contemporary city life a special investment of time,
energy, and thought must be devoted to the family -- and business
affairs may suffer by the diversion of this effort. But unless the
diversion is made, the family is de-personalized; its domestic
interaction sinks to the lowest possible level. The tragedy of this is
seen in those homes in which the father is a tolerated intruder, the
legitimate victim of the "gold-digging" activities of his wife and
children, but wholly lacking in personal influence simply because he has
made no investment of personality in the home.

On the other hand there is always the danger that lack of money may
cramp all efforts at beautiful living. Although there are standards of
living to fit every income, it happens too often that people do not know
how to use [p.239] and enjoy the standard which their income permits.
The most annoying dilemmas present themselves: to give up the higher
standard or to pay for it in continuous financial worries; to maintain
the pleasant specialization of function which gives the wife her work in
the home or to have the wife take a job, thus bringing in more money to
the family but withdrawing from it some of her time and attention. Even
children have to be bought and paid for, and to parents who have high
standards in rearing them they are a luxury indeed.

Somewhere a balance must be struck. And for one who would plan a married
life with sanity and art the naive success-philosophy of contemporary
America is the poorest possible guide. The articles of this current
creed must be seasoned with some of the salt of Aristotle's venerable
distinction between _oikonomia_ and chrematistics, between the art of
acquiring what is needful and the art of acquiring without limit. No
money plan is adequate which does not point to an equilibrium of means
and desires. The striving for wealth without limit, for automobiles each
year more expensive and living quarters each year more luxurious, is an
endeavor consistent with good marriage only on condition that it does
not absorb all the energies of life. The true art of the family concerns
itself only with acquiring what is needful. This penetrating observation
is as good to-day as it was twenty-four centuries ago.

Here at last we have before us the complete aesthetic situation of
marriage. For if the married persons are the artists, and a flow of
shared experiences is the product of their art, then these three
things -- their physical bodies, their social environment, their
material belongings -- are [p.240] their tools and instruments. The
quality of the instrument always sets a limit to the artistic
accomplishment which can result from its use, and therefore these
instruments operate also to limit the range of art in marriage, to set
bounds to the flow of its shared experiences. The fact that these limits
are set need not mislead the artisan. He must look to his tools, but
must also look beyond them. He must distinguish between means and ends.
The marriage artist who devotes all his attention to self-cultivation,
or who concentrates his powers upon social success and economic
achievement, is like a musician who should spend a lifetime tuning his
instrument and never play upon it, or a carver who should devote his
energies to sharpening his knife and never touch it to the wood.

In this aesthetic situation, coitus is the supreme challenge to marriage
art. AEsthetically the sex act can be an end in itself; it can fulfill
itself in a beautiful moment in the present; it can be significant as a
single episode, valuable in its own right. Beyond this, it is
potentially the most intimately shared of all marriage experiences, and
hence it is always significant as part of a total stream of shared
experience, just as those crises which touch deeply all classes of a
nation are most significant as episodes in national history. If we think
of the movement of life in marriage as having a harmonic and a melodic
quality, sex is potentially both a rich chord in its harmony and a
pervasive motive in its melody.

The play of sex is subject to the widest extremes of artistic success
and failure. Good artistry requires knowledge, skill, sensitiveness, in
the command of the instruments of marriage.

Of the external instruments of marriage, money is the [p.241] least
important as a means to successful sex life. It is notorious that sex
love can flourish in poverty and starve in the midst of wealth. True
enough, wealth may permit more elaborate wooing, and poverty may inhibit
pleasure by causing the mind to dwell upon the fear of pregnancy. But in
general the art of sex is little influenced by material things.

The consequences of social environment enter more significantly into the
artistry of sex life. On the one hand society may have instilled into
the minds of husband and wife prejudices on sex which have an inhibitory
effect. (These are likely to arise, of course, from the attitudes which
are taught as a means of enforcing sex monopoly.) On the other hand, the
husband and wife are likely to have absorbed from their social
environment certain systems of romantic symbols which will serve to
ornament the art of sex, and to fill each wooing with delicate meanings.
In the use of their social heritage as an instrument of sex art, those
conventional attitudes which despise sex as unclean must be discarded,
and the cultural embellishments of sex values retained. Thus sex as a
symbol will gain dignity and beauty.

The most important instrument of sex is of course the body. Hence a
knowledge of anatomy and physiology is an indispensable prerequisite to
the practice of the art of sex. It is not implied that this must be book
knowledge, or that things must be known by names derived from Greek or
Latin roots. But knowledge there must be of some such minimum as this:
That, physiologically speaking the sex act is accomplished in three
stages -- first, tumescence, or the preparatory intensifying of sex
feeling; then the orgasm, the crisis of the act; finally
detumes[p.242]cence, the rapid ebbing away of sex feeling and the
general relaxation or torpor which follows sex satisfaction. The
artistic value of the sex act as shared experience requires that, first
the man and woman should each carry the process through all three of its
phases, and second that the progress should be as nearly simultaneous as
possible. If the man reaches the orgasm too quickly the woman will fail
to experience it at all. The man who understands the physiology of sex
can often correct such disharmonies by taking pains to stimulate more
amply the tumescent process in the woman, while restraining the process
in himself, thus compensating for physiological differences.

The artistry of sex requires further that an adequate wooing should
precede each consummation. In this wooing culturally derived ideas of
beauty and romantic symbolism are fused with more purely physiological
values. This is the stage of the sex act in which culture contributes
most richly to its content.

Finally, in the orgasm, the participants reach into an extracultural or
pre-cultural world. Theirs is a "coalescing of illusion and reality, as
in a dream." The whole psychic experience comes to a crisis, like a
quarrel, in a transmutation of values.

Good sex artistry is perhaps no less rare than good artistry in other
things. There are men who expect of their sex life no more dignity and
scarcely more pleasure than they associate with their excrementary
functions. There are wives who never experience the orgasm, either
because their husbands lack skill, or because they themselves are so
hampered by warped ideas that they cannot be participants in coitus, but
only victims of rape. Such [p.243] conditions starve a marriage, by
leaving unfulfilled the potentiality of its most intimate shared
experience.

The exceptional potentiality of coitus as the expression of intimacy in
marriage passes away in time. As age advances, ecstasy yields something
to habit; ultimately sex interests recede from the foreground, leaving
the whole chain of sex-episodes established in the stream of shared
experience. The change is both physiological and psychological. And it
is often accompanied by a general movement from intense participation in
things to more passive contemplation of them. In the best ordered lives
the necessity and significance of the conflict as the expression of
self-feeling slips away also. Both coitus and conflict lose their
primacy, but meanwhile they have accomplished their respective ends.

For these type-crises of the early period of a family's life history
make a definite contribution which is retained through later periods.
The contribution attaches not only to the family as a unit, but to the
separate individuals as well. Successful coitus opens up a new level of
psychic energy, developing what Havelock Ellis calls the erotic
personality. And successful conflict episodes smooth off the corners of
personal difference.

Thus the economy of marriage proceeds toward a contemplative
equilibrium. The crises which mark the greatest tension of independent
personalities prepare the way for their better harmony, and the crises
which mark the nearest fusion of two beings give to them greater depth
and integrity. These are permanent achievements. They are manifested
directly in the life of the family, and they are so far possessed by the
individual that he will carry the greater depth of character and greater
adapta[p.244]bility into other relations of life, and will continue to
retain them even if the family passes out of existence.

From this standpoint coitus has an importance beyond that of the
contribution it makes to the flow of shared experience in marriage. For
it is also a fact of highest significance in the life history of the
individual. "The longer I live," writes Havelock Ellis. "the more I
realize the immense importance for the individual of the development
through the play function of sex of erotic personality, and for human
society of the acquirement of the art of love . . . until it is
generally possible to acquire erotic personality and to master the art
of loving, the development of the individual man or woman is marred, the
acquirement of human happiness and harmony remains impossible."

  . . . A woman may have been married once, she may have been married
  twice, she may have had children by both husbands; and yet it may not
  be until she is past the age of thirty and is united to a third man
  that she attains the development of erotic personality and all that it
  involves in the full flowering of her whole nature. Up to then she has
  to all appearance had all the essential experiences of life. Yet she
  has remained spiritually virginal with conventionally prim ideas of
  life, narrow in her sympathies, with the finest and noblest functions
  of her soul helpless and bound, at heart unhappy even if not clearly
  realizing that she is unhappy. Now she has become another person. The
  new-liberated forces from within have not only enabled her to become
  sensitive to the rich complexities of intimate personal relationship;
  they have enlarged and harmonized all realization of all relationships
  Her new erotic experience has not only stimulated all her energies,
  but her new knowledge has quickened all her sympathies. She feels, at
  the same time, more alert mentally, and she finds that she is more
  alive than before to the influences of Nature [p.245] and of art.
  Moreover, as others observe, however they may explain it, a new beauty
  has come into her face, a new radiance into her expression, a new
  force into all her activities. Such is the exquisite flowering of love
  which some of us who may penetrate beneath the surface of life are now
  and then privileged to see. The sad part of it is that we see it so
  seldom, and then often so late.[23]

Just as the erotic experience accomplishes an integration of the
personality, so episodes of conflict render the person more adaptable to
his surroundings. These effects come about only on condition that the
episodes of coitus or conflict are completed. An incompleted quarrel
which hangs fire for years, never resulting in a transmutation of
values, never consummated but only interrupted, is far from effecting an
adaptation of the person to his surroundings. Such conflicts fix the
attention upon their subject-matter, whatever it may be. They cause a
person to be hypersensitive to this particular point of contact with his
surroundings, while to certain other points of contact he has no
sensitivity at all. The incompleted quarrel magnifies one thing out of
all proportion, and leads as a psychopathic extreme to the fixed idea,
just as the sex act if incomplete may bring about hysteria.

Some people never learn to the end of their days the art of resolving a
conflict. There are querulous old men who carry grudges dating back to
their youth, and aged shrews who in scolding will introduce historical
data culled from the whole period of the marriage. These personalities
are maladjusted. They are encrusted within a shell of their own making;
they are hardened to their [p.246] surroundings. Whoever is around them
feels the hardness. There are other people who all their days shrink
from conflict, leaving all their thwarted desires to turn in upon
themselves. A quiet mousy little woman who had murdered her husband
declared that life with him had become unendurable, according to the
account. "Why didn't you separate from him?" "Oh, I couldn't hurt his
feelings like that," was the reply.

Hers was certainly an unbalanced character, unadjusted, because of
softness rather than through hardness. She had not dared to set her
personality up against her husband's, to stage a conflict and come to a
conclusion. There are many cases which resemble this save that they fall
short of the extreme of murder. No open quarrels, nothing unseemly; but
hidden resentments display themselves in little dagger-like remarks
which are none the less deadly for the fact that their wound is almost
imperceptible from without. The oppressed personality poisons the
relationship it is not adaptable enough to meet, nor strong enough to
conquer.

The marriage test is only a special instance in which there is tried and
proved a man's ability to make accommodation of self to another -- to
keep himself intact while taking the other into account. All human
relationships require something of this accommodation. If marriage
requires more of it than others, it is simply because marriage is the
most intensely personal of relationships. And for this same reason
marriage and family life are capable of fostering the quality which they
so rigorously put to the proof. While the child is learning the elements
of the science of personal adjustment, his parents are making more
advanced studies. To one who masters [p.247] the supreme art of entering
sympathetically into another person's point of view, advancing age
promises an accumulation of wisdom and composure; to one who has not
mastered this art age threatens to bring only an accumulation of
prejudices and of irritability.

Thus the exploration of marriage as an art leads to the revelation of
marriage as education. The diverse threads of the discourse meet in this
conclusion. Here is one fact: the active engagement of two independent
wills which operate upon each other. And here is another fact: the
cumulation of shared episodes, created by means of certain instruments,
taking their place in the stream of experience. The first fact is
typified in the conflict, and the second in coitus. The two facts
manifest themselves infinitely in other ways. They are present even when
there is no conflict and no coitus. They are significant not alone in
the artistry of marriage but also in the development of personality.
Successful will-adjustments, necessary because each personality is
distinct and intact, lead to a harmony of self and other; successful
shared experience, arising from a harmony of self and other, gives inner
strength, unity, harmony, to the separate personality. This is the
delicately balanced economy of marriage as a technique and an art.

[p.248]

THE principles of marriage value and of marriage art have necessarily
brought to a common focus the problem which confronts the individual
acting alone and the problem which confronts two individuals acting
together. For both of these situations are present where marriage value
and marriage art are at stake.

But in the inner forum at the mind where decisions are made there is
only One. And hence the result of a synoptic treatment of the activity
of One and Two brings a certain amount of conclusion. Problems of
marriage value come, ultimately, to the problem of the personal conduct
of one who in the utter privacy of his own heart is meditating whether
to engage in a marriage or of what to do with a marriage in which he is
engaged.

The foregoing discussion is intended to find application in the thought
of an individual who is making: actual decisions. Therefore a theory
upon marriage values and art values in marriage has been developed with
a view to maximum self-consistency. For that which at present renders
choices on matters of marriage difficult is a confusion of ideals, or
the lack of any ideal which is adequate and coherent in all its parts.

In matters of love it sometimes happens that a man does not regard
himself as a free agent, capable of making choices as a consequence of
meditation. He pictures [p.249] himself rather as a chip in the stream,
carried whithersoever it may be by forces beyond his control. He says of
his love affair that the very force and pressure of his love compels him
to seek marriage, leaving no other alternative or he thinks of his
marriage that his total fund of prejudice and attitude is so disposed
toward it that it is impossible for him to continue it.

Since he is acting as the plaything of blind forces, ideals would be a
useless encumbrance to him. They might serve him indeed to measure the
height to which he has risen or the depth to which he has fallen, but
they could not aid him in controlling his fate because he is not trying
to control it. Only the man who is seeking to govern his destiny by
means of his intelligence is in a position to make use of this or any
other theory of marriage.

Moreover, neither this system of marriage ideals nor any other can
present itself to his mind with utter and absolute validity. It is only
when a certain presupposition is accepted that a specific system of
values unfolds. In this case the presupposition has been made that
marriage is essentially a personal relationship. The specific values of
marriage, loyalty value and duration value, have been deduced from this
assumption. If this presupposition is accepted, then and then only do
the principles of marriage as herein outlined come into play to serve
the individual who is making the choice.

Therefore, as another fundamental choice, the individual must decide
whether he is to consider his marriage problem as if marriage were
essentially a personal relationship. If he decides in the negative,
choosing to regard his marriage as essentially a socially useful
institu[p.250]tion or a heaven-decreed duty, then he can make no
practical use of the principles here laid down.

If he accepts the hypothesis that marriage is essentially a personal
relationship, he will acknowledge the validity of the system of values
that is deduced therefrom. He accepts, for instance, the standard of
domestic excellence which accounts as best that family which maintains
most durably the highest level of domestic interaction.

The use that is to be made of this system of values or ideals depends
upon the nature of the decision in hand: whether it is the question
confronting the unmarried or the married.

The unmarried person is concerned with the problem whether he should
marry or not. He must acknowledge that so far as he is concerned the
critical question is whether he is willing to commit himself to a
permanent, personal, paramount loyalty. This is not an arbitrary
question, raised whimsically like the question of blondes versus
brunettes. It is the necessary question which lies at the threshold of
all careful thinking on a marriage problem.

The question of loyalty poses itself in more general forms. For there
are loyalties which are not paramount, and paramount loyalties which are
not personal, and paramount personal loyalties which do not endure.

A paramount loyalty is desirable as an instrument of the integrity of
the self. For conduct in which the sell is most clearly manifested, that
is to say purposive conduct, is subject to an hierarchy of purposes or
ends. That which is an end with respect to an inferior series of acts is
a means with respect to a superior series. The person who [p.251] has a
mind so ordered that the hierarchy of his purposes is dominated by a
supreme purpose or paramount loyalty is at peace with himself. His
energies do not cancel each other out in internal tensions. Therefore
there is a value to any one under all circumstances in having an object
of paramount loyalty.

This object need not be personal. One can fill his life with an
impersonal loyalty to Socialism, to the Church, to Prohibition, to the
Fatherland. Or one may accept tentatively some object of paramount
loyalty, leaving it to the future to decide whether he will retain it or
not. Thus in the general range of choice that lies before a man, the
loyalty requirement of marriage is highly specialized.

The man who desires to commit himself to the special kind of attitude
that marriage requires may still be in doubt whether his present will
can effectively project itself into an indefinite future. Unforeseen
circumstances may put an end to the state which he intends to be
permanent, or set before him something which transcends in value that
which he has purposed to regard as supremely valuable. In committing
himself to a loyalty that is at once paramount, personal and permanent,
he may fear that the commitment may be subject to change by factors not
under his control.

It is here that introspection must run when one is testing his own mind
to determine whether it is adequately prepared for marriage. It is not
to be expected that this introspection is infallible, nor that it will
eliminate risk, but at least it will focus attention upon the facts that
are most significant with reference to the probable excellence of the
marriage that is to be undertaken.

[p.252] This is not the traditional diagnostic of love. These are not
the signs which Shakespeare listed --

  . . . the lover,
  Sighing like a furnace, with a woeful ballad
  Made to his mistress' eyebrow.

whereby the premarital state is to be identified. It does not have much
place in our romantic tradition that one should order his mind upon his
love affair by asking himself: "Do I take her up as my permanent hobby?"
This is none the less the essential question of courtship; its
importance is implicit in the hypothesis that marriage is a personal
relationship.

The person who is already married finds a different type of problem
confronting him: at most he may be wondering whether to maintain the
marriage or terminate it; at least he is concerned to know at what level
of domestic interaction to maintain the marriage.

Speaking and acting for himself alone he has only a limited control over
the level upon which his family is to function. If his partner is
domestically active, it rests with him to determine whether he will give
or withhold his cooperation, and hence he has the option of choosing any
level from the unilateral to the romantic. But if his partner is
domestically inert, and fails to cooperate, then his latitude of choice
is limited He has only to decide whether he will maintain single-handed
a unilateral level of domestic interaction, or give up the game and run
the relationship on a strictly exchange basis, on the economic level. It
will rest with him then to adapt his practice of the art of marriage to
the level upon which the family is functioning.

[p.253] If he undertakes to maintain paramount loyalty toward his
marriage partner, despite the fact that it is not reciprocated, and to
act domestically though he receives neither appreciation nor
benevolence, he must assimilate the relationship to that of a parent to
a child, from whom one exacts neither appreciation nor benevolent
activity. This is the consequence of functioning upon the unilateral
level.

The limitations of the marriage partner, the inertness, the
unresponsiveness, is then a challenge to art. For just as the parent
seeks to lead the child to take a more responsive part in their
relationship, so the husband or wife seeks to increase the domestic
qualities of the marriage partner, in order that the level of domestic
interaction may be raised.

Under these conditions the most open activity takes the form of
histrionics, preferably, for it is by increasing one's value to the
other that one stimulates greater appreciation and loyalty. Pedagogics
must be subtle and contention must never overstrain the loyalty that
exists. The object of contention must be not the winning of an argument
but the creation of a satisfactory episode. This means that perfect
control is necessary. In the creating of shared experiences, one person
alone can do much; in controlling their place in the stream of
experiences he can do even more, for he can forget the things that are
to be consigned to oblivion and remind the other of the things that are
to be remembered. And in all this, one must seek an artist's
satisfaction in a task well done.

This is the pattern of art to be followed by those who seek to raise the
level of domestic interaction; but one [p.254] may prefer to let the
marriage drift on the economic level. In the latter case one makes no
effort to raise the level of excellence, but sets out rather to live
one's own life and to be as comfortable as conditions permit. He commits
nothing to the marriage and hence is incapable of losing much by it. If
in the turn of events it comes about that the marriage becomes too
disadvantageous, it is allowed to lapse. No significant development of
personality issues from such a marriage; no deep sympathy develops the
self, nor do adequate conflicts teach adaptation. Quarrels are avoided
not for histrionic or pedagogic reasons, but in sheer indifference to
considerations of personality and in order to avoid annoyance.
Self-development goes unnourished by sympathy; adaptation, taking place
without consummated conflict, is of the surface only. For these reasons
the marriage on the economic level bears a superficial resemblance to
the marriage on the romantic level, but it lacks depth, and is at the
mercy of circumstances. The problem it presents to the individual is
simple -- to get as much and give as little as possible.

The individual acting alone has then alternatives of these kinds before
him. If the question is whether to marry or not, he searches himself for
his answer to the problems of loyalty. If he finds that he is willing to
commit himself fully, then his is the optimum attitude for marriage. If
the question is what to do with a marriage already on his hands, he
alone, on his own responsibility, can at least decide whether to carry
on the family life on the unilateral or economic level.

If he finds that he is not willing to commit himself to an adequate
loyalty then his reasons for marrying lie [p.255] somewhere off the
level of the principles of marriage. Perhaps it is a matter of sex
experiment, or conformity to convention, or economic advantage; these
are reasons to be weighed on a different scale. Nor is it to be expected
that a marriage entered upon for such reasons will yield much value as
marriage unless a change of attitude takes place.

And if he chooses the economic rather than the unilateral level of
domestic interaction (this choice being of course the only one that is
absolutely within his power) then he voluntarily surrenders whatever
domestic value might be accessible to him. The question whether to
continue or terminate the marriage is then removed to another plane,
where one reckons up costs and profits on a balance sheet.

But can one ever get away from this thing of reckoning up costs and
profits on a balance sheet? Is not the very issue between choosing
domestic values or rejecting them a matter to be weighed by the mind in
terms of its advantages and disadvantages? And what after all is the
advantage to the individual it he reaches for domestic values rather
than other values? It is senseless to raise the question of happiness in
sheer quantitative form, to ask whether domestic values will ultimately
yield a greater sum of satisfaction. For matters of happiness are more
intelligibly analyzed in terms of quality than of quantity. And hence
the individual puts his query in this form: What is the particular kind
of satisfaction that lies before me if I choose to strive for domestic
values? Why should I prefer these to others? Why should I make the
domestic man an ideal of my life?

This query submits the marriage ideal to a new test. [p.256] It would be
absurd, within the scope of this essay, to claim for it any absolute
preëminence over other ideals of life. For it is not purposed here to
outline a comprehensive ethic. All that a theory of this kind can do is
to show what things hang together, and what the full implication may be
if one accepts or rejects marriage values as an object of life. Hence
the need for coherence and consistency in the principles of marriage.

The theories of marriage values and of art values in marriage have a
superficial appearance of inconsistency, for they are differently
derived. The concepts of loyalty value and duration value were deduced
from the fundamental assumption that marriage is a personal
relationship. The scheme of art values was developed by analogy of
marriage with other arts. The world of marriage values is a world of
purpose and intention. To intend well is to do well in terms of marriage
values, but not in terms of art. The domestic man may be a bad artist;
his intentions may always fall short of achievement, and for all that he
is none the less the domestic man. The two theories delineate different
standards of excellence. The symmetrical level of domestic interaction
is the highest standard of family life according to the scheme of
marriage value, whereas successful marriage art is to be judged not by
levels of intention and behavior in the family but by stages in the
development at personality.

Art value is thus individualistic; marriage value is not. But marriage
values are necessary preconditions to the attainment of the highest art
value. The reward which the individual receives for an enduring loyalty
to another is a higher development of his own personality. The [p.257]
man who stands alone, facing the issues of marriage, reckons then in
terms at the contribution marriage will make to his own personality.
Anything else is false reckoning.

Perhaps it follows from this that marriage is not the best of the
alternatives that lie before one. Undoubtedly many adults, both wedded
and single, are seeking in marriage for values extraneous thereto, and
many are by their training unfitted to appreciate the actual marriage
values. Yet it is only fair, since marriage has been rather relentlessly
exposed, to demand that the complete consequences of alternatives to
marriage should be equally laid open. What are, then, the full
implications as a life object of personal ambition, the pursuit of
pleasure, or the purposeless contemplation of things? If these
alternative life ideals are scrutinized with the care which has been
given to scrutinizing the ideal of marriage, their apparent adequacy to
fill a life may rapidly dissolve away.

The purpose of this essay is accomplished, however, without pursuing
these questions. The two authors have not been minded to set up as
counselors of mankind. They have wished only to trace out
comprehensively the implications of certain lines of thought that seemed
to come upon them out of nature itself. For if marriage is the kind of
thing they think it is, then these are its implicit principles. Further
than that, they make no presumptions.

And if the language of domestic theory has been at times repellant
because of words that come with unkindly flavor to English speech, this
has been a sacrifice in the interests of intellectual adequacy -- in
order that issue [p.258] might be joined with other theories. Need it be
said that the principles of marriage are practiced in family life,
regardless of how they are stated? They do not need to be stated in
order to be true.

[p.259]

Alberti, 23

Ambivalence, 176

Appreciation, 123_ff_., 158, 177, 190, 253

Aristotle, 22, 26, 92, 202, 239

Art and marriage, 219_ff_.

Asymmetrical level, 157_ff_., 170, 179. _See also_ Unilateral level,
Domestic activity

Authority, 78_ff_.

Autonomy, of family, 64, 72, 76, 99, 136, 181; of personality, 36, 177

Benevolent activity, 109, 113, 114, 124, 130, 153, 162, 177, 190, 191,
205, 222, 253

Biological system, 157_ff_., 170, _See also_ Pseudo-parental system;
Domestic systems

Birth control, 16, 143, 146, 167. _See also_ Contraception

Bodin, 27

Boethius, 35

Briffault, 212

Calverton, 189

Catlin, 102

Cato the Elder, 61

Cherishing, 88, 101, 104, 105, 109, 113. _See also_ Love

Children, 138-141, 154, 167_ff_., 239

Church view of marriage, 9, 16, 24, 44, 45, 48, 49, 104, 144, 147, 188

Clapp, Edwin R., 229

Coitus, 43, 44, 49, 72, 98, 125, 129, 171, 190, 191, 194, 203, 211,
226-228, 241, 242-245, 247

Columbia University, 16

Comte, 73

Conflict episode, 224, 228, 243- 247

Confucius, 58, 224

Contraception, 138, 140, 168, 192, 210. _See also_ Birth control

Convention, 63_ff_., 141, 143, 145, 151, 208, 213, 214

Cooper, 168, 211

Creative workmanship, 64, 67, 71, 132, 186, 253

Davis, 168

Delmar, 167, 173

Dennett, 18

Diderot, 71

Dissociation, 103, 200, 201

Dix, Dorothy, 25

Domestic activity, 73, 123, 131, 132, 154, 157, 174, 179, 206, 207, 217,
220, 225, 250, 253, 256. _See also_ Asymmetrical, Symmetrical, Economic,
Uni[p.260]lateral levels; Appreciation; Benevolent activity

Domestic interaction. _See_ Domestic activity

Domestic man, 30, 101-105, 109, 110, 111, 114, 116, 122, 153, 255, 256

Domestic relationship. _See_ Domestic activity

Domestic systems, 157_ff_. _See also_ Romantic, Pseudo-patriarchal,
Biological, Impersonal systems

Don Juan, 47, 50, 121, 195

Duration, 48, 50, 151, 154, 178, 204, 206, 212, 251, 256

Economic level, 157, 252, 254, 255. _See also_ Domestic activity,
Nondomestic level

Economics, 89_ff._, 154

Edib, Halide, 69

Ellis, 13, 18, 120, 243, 244

Empedocles, 120

Erotic personality, 33, 244

Extravert, 127, 161

F. P. A., 81

Family, definitions of, 52_ff.;_ membership in, 55, 56, 60, 153, 181,
205; types of, 156_ff.;_ variable relationship of, 57

Fluegal, 201

Freud, 120

Function of family, 134_ff._, 157, 165

Gengi, 195

Gilman, 18

Glyn, 13, 129

Goodsell, 18

Groves, 17, 18

Groves and Ogburn, 211

Habit, 128_ff_., 177, 181

Hamilton, 16, 17, 95, 104, 125, 147, 150, 172, 181, 188, 189, 190, 194,
196, 200, 214

Happiness, 3, 4, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 165, 255

Hecht, 8

Hedonism, 148, 149, 151

Henry, 158

Hinkle, 18

Histrionics, 222, 226, 229, 230, 237, 253, 254

Hobbes, 27

Humor, 229

Hurst, 167

Impersonal system, 157, 170. _See also_ Domestic systems

Individual and marriage, 248_ff._

Instruments of marriage, 235, 239, 240

Introvert, 127, 161

Isolation, 64, 70, 99, 136, 181, 190

Jung, 127

Kantor, 35, 106, 107

Key, 143

Keyserling, 16, 18, 84, 85, 134, 148, 150

Knight, 208

Kretschmer, 127

LePlay, 24

Lindsay, 208, 213

[p.261] Love, 4, 7-10, 29-33, 38, 39, 44, 63, 76, 101_ff_., 109, 118,
119-122, 127, 128_ff_., 143, 171, 181, 207, 243, 252. _See also_
Cherishing

Love-tenure marriage, 193, 195, 196, 201, 206, 207, 208

Loyalty. _See_ Paramount loyalty

Luther, 24, 68

Lynd, 8, 25, 168

Macy, 79, 82

Malinowski, 40, 176, 213

Malthus, 20

Marriage, definition of, 42_ff._

McDougall, 13

McGowan, 17

Mead, 18, 41, 108

Meier-Graeffe, 221

Membership. _See_ Family

Mencken, 13

Michelet, 131

Mill, 20

Molière, 15

Motive, 105_ff._, 130, 131, 153

Mowrer, 18, 47

Mousetrap theory, 7, 13, 14

Mueller-Lyer, 18

Natural family, 52_ff._

Newman, 120

Nondomestic level, 175, 206. _See_ Economic level, Domestic activity

Ogburn, 144, 145, 153. _See also_ Graves and Ogburn

Oikonomia, 20, 22, 25, 239

Ovid, 120

Paramount loyalty, 114, 115, 119, 121, 153, 190, 191, 204, 205, 211,
216, 250, 253, 256. _See also_ Preponderant interest

Park, 35

Park and Burgess, 75

Pater, 232

Pedagogics, 222, 225, 230, 253, 254

Personal relationship, 31_ff._, 42, 51, 60, 73, 96, 153, 178, 197, 249,
250, 256

Personality, 26, 27, 35_ff._, 41, 61, 73, 76, 83_ff._, 104, 108, 169,
176, 177, 238, 257

Polarity, 85

Proponderant interest, 119, 123. _See also_ Paramount loyalty

Pseudo-parental system, 157_ff._ _See also_ Biological system, Domestic
systems

Pseudo-patriarchal system, 157_ff._, 170, 173, 176, 180, 223. _See also_
Domestic systems

Quarrel. _See_ Conflict episode

Quesnay, 27

Rabelais, 11

Romantic system, 157_ff._, 170, 173. 176, 179, 180, 207, 252, 254. _See
also_ Domestic systems

Saltus, 120

Scheler, 120

Schmalhausen, 18

Schoolgirl theory, 7, 8, 11, 14, 207

Schopenhauer, 120

[p.262] Seabury, 182

Self-interest, 89_ff._

Sex act. _See_ Coitus.

Sex monopoly, 44, 45, 188_ff._

Smith, Adam, 27

Social sciences, 2, 19, 20_ff._, 28

Socially given concepts, 65_ff._, 142, 236, 241

Spranger, 127

Stendhal, 120

Stopes, 211

Symmetrical level, 157_ff._, 175, 179, 180, 256. _See_ Domestic activity

Thomas, 75

Thomson, 106, 109

Time and marriage, 128_ff._, 177, 180, 232, _See also_ Duration

Tomcat theory, 7, 11, 60, 70, 96, 129

Troland, 106

Unilateral level, 157_ff._, 170, 179, 206, 223, 252, 255. _See also_
Asymmetrical level, Domestic activity

Vaihinger, 139

Vassar College, 16, 25

Veblen, 93

Westermarck, 18

Willoughby, 82

Xenophon, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25

[1] This fact is objectively demonstrated in the interesting and
scholarly study of an average American community made under the
direction of Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd: _Middletown_
(Harcourt, Brace, New York, 1929).]

[2] McDougall in _The Forum_, July, 1928.

[3] "The Protestant Church View of Sex, Love and Marriage," in _Current
History_, February, 1929.

[4] Dr. G. V. Hamilton is a pioneer in the statistical investigation of
the sex lives of normal married people. He selected as subjects one
hundred married men and one hundred married women of New York City,
trying to balance his selection in such a way that about half were
happily married, half unhappily. He then took down the answers these
subjects gave to a long series of carefully propounded and devastatingly
intimate questions. The number of cases examined was too small, the
selection too arbitrary, even the scope of the questioning
(predominantly on sex matters) too restricted, to allow his findings to
stand as a true statistical picture of marriage in America. The
investigator himself disavows this intention. The fact remains that on
many of the most significant points of fact in marriage relations, Dr.
Hamilton's figures are the only ones that represent more than a guess.
For Hamilton has done several things that are new. Although his approach
is that of a psychiatrist, he has undertaken to study normal marriage.
And he has striven relentlessly to secure results into which no
surreptitious influence of the investigator's prejudices has crept. His
results are published in two volumes, _A Research in Marriage_ by
Hamilton, and _What is Wrong with Marriage_, by Hamilton and McGowan (A.
& C. Boni, New York, 1929).

[5] Paraphrased from B. Malinowski, _Crime and Custom in Savage Society_
(Harcourt, Brace, New York, 1926), p. 3.

[6] Cited in E. R. Mowrer, _Family Disorganization_ (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1927), p. 183.

[7] Halide Edib, "A Turkish Feminist Views Women Here," _New York Times
Magazine_, October 7, 1928.

[8] R. E. Park and E. W. Burgess, _Introduction to the Science of
Sociology_ (University of Chicano Press, Chicago, 1924), p. 55.

[9] The logical difficulty of conceiving of complete persons as members
of a collective unity has been explored in the theological discussion of
the Trinity, which requires of us that we think of the Trinity without
"confusing the persons nor confounding the substance."

[10] Count Hermann Keyserling, _The Book of Marriage_ (Harcourt, Brace,
New York, 1926), p. 8.

[11] Reprinted from Kahlil Gibran, _The Prophet_ (Alfred A. Knopf, New
York, 1923), by special permission of the publishers.

[12] R. Kantor, _Principles of Psychology_ (Alfred A. Knopf, New York,
1924), Vol. 1., p. 129.

[13] Margaret Mead, _Coming of Age in Samoa_ (William Morrow, New York,
1928).

[14] ". . . love is not, as they say or give to understand, a crisis, a
drama in one act. If it were nothing but that, an accident so transitory
would hardly be worth the trouble of giving it notice. . . . But
fortunately love, and by that I mean a faithful love fixed upon an
object, is a succession, often long, of very different passions which
feed life and renew it . . . the flame does not burn except on condition
that it rises, lowers, rises again and varies in form and color. Nature
has made provision for this. The aspects of a woman change unceasingly;
one woman includes a thousand. And the imagination of the man varies the
point of view. Upon a foundation, generally solid and tenacious of
habit, the situation traces changes which modify and rejuvenate
affection." J. Michelet, _L'Amour_ (Paris, 1859), p. 8-9.

[15] Contraceptive practices are practically universal among the
professional and business people of America, though not yet universal in
the working-class families. Dr. Hamilton found that all the subjects of
his research used contraceptives except those who desired children, and
those who were sterile. Katherine B. Davis found that their use was
practically universal among college women. Dr. Cooper estimates that of
a certain contraceptive device, no less than 2,000,000 are used every
day. The survey of _Middletown_ bore out this conclusion as regards
business-class families. The 27 wives of the business class who gave
evidence in the inquiry all made use of contraceptives. But as to the 77
working-class women, only 22 used contraceptives, and of these only 10
used devices that were as good, technologically, as those used by the
business-class women. (_Middletown_, p. 134). The publishers of the
latest and best book on the subject, Dr. Cooper's _The Technique of
Contraception_ (Day-Nichols, New York, 1928), believes that very few of
the physicians of the country are equipped to give the best advice on
birth control. Only two or three medical colleges give courses on the
subject, and probably 90 or 95 per cent of the physicians have never
received instruction.

[16] See also J. C. Fluegel, _A Psycho-analytic Study of the Family_
(International Psycho-analytic Press, London-New York, 1921).

[17] David Seabury, _Growing into Life_ (Horace Liveright, New York,
1928), p. 378.

[18] V. F. Calverton, _The Bankruptcy of Marriage_ (Macaulay, New York,
1928).

[19] J. C. Fluegel, _The Psycho-analytic Study of the Family_ (The
International Psycho-analytic Press, London - New York, 1921), p. 110.
Freud's hypothesis that this dissociation is a direct result of
infantile incestuous desires and jealousies seems to the writer
far-fetched. The phenomenon, common enough, would seem to be
sufficiently accounted for by the strong anti-sexual bias in the
training of children -- a bias which is motivated by the desire to keep
the children chaste till marriage.

[20] Groves and Ogburn, _American Marriage_ (Henry Holt, New York,
1928), p. 106.

[21] Robert Briffault in _The Mothers_ collects many instances of this.

[22] For an insight into the importance of the difference between the
participant attitude and the spectator attitude, the writers are
indebted to an essay by Edwin Clapp, to be published in the _South
Atlantic Quarterly_ in 1929.

[23] Havelock Ellis, "Love as an Art," in Keyserling: _The Book of
Marriage_ (Harcourt, Brace, New York, 1926), p. 387.
